Towards the end of November, during a thaw, at nine o’clock one
morning, a train on the Warsaw and Petersburg railway was approaching
the latter city at full speed. The morning was so damp and misty that
it was only with great difficulty that the day succeeded in breaking;
and it was impossible to distinguish anything more than a few yards
away from the carriage windows.

Some of the passengers by this particular train were returning from
abroad; but the third-class carriages were the best filled, chiefly
with insignificant persons of various occupations and degrees, picked
up at the different stations nearer town. All of them seemed weary, and
most of them had sleepy eyes and a shivering expression, while their
complexions generally appeared to have taken on the colour of the fog
outside.

When day dawned, two passengers in one of the third-class carriages
found themselves opposite each other. Both were young fellows, both
were rather poorly dressed, both had remarkable faces, and both were
evidently anxious to start a conversation. If they had but known why,
at this particular moment, they were both remarkable persons, they
would undoubtedly have wondered at the strange chance which had set
them down opposite to one another in a third-class carriage of the
Warsaw Railway Company.

One of them was a young fellow of about twenty-seven, not tall, with
black curling hair, and small, grey, fiery eyes. His nose was broad and
flat, and he had high cheek bones; his thin lips were constantly
compressed into an impudent, ironical—it might almost be called a
malicious—smile; but his forehead was high and well formed, and atoned
for a good deal of the ugliness of the lower part of his face. A
special feature of this physiognomy was its death-like pallor, which
gave to the whole man an indescribably emaciated appearance in spite of
his hard look, and at the same time a sort of passionate and suffering
expression which did not harmonize with his impudent, sarcastic smile
and keen, self-satisfied bearing. He wore a large fur—or rather
astrachan—overcoat, which had kept him warm all night, while his
neighbour had been obliged to bear the full severity of a Russian
November night entirely unprepared. His wide sleeveless mantle with a
large cape to it—the sort of cloak one sees upon travellers during the
winter months in Switzerland or North Italy—was by no means adapted to
the long cold journey through Russia, from Eydkuhnen to St. Petersburg.

The wearer of this cloak was a young fellow, also of about twenty-six
or twenty-seven years of age, slightly above the middle height, very
fair, with a thin, pointed and very light coloured beard; his eyes were
large and blue, and had an intent look about them, yet that heavy
expression which some people affirm to be a peculiarity as well as
evidence, of an epileptic subject. His face was decidedly a pleasant
one for all that; refined, but quite colourless, except for the
circumstance that at this moment it was blue with cold. He held a
bundle made up of an old faded silk handkerchief that apparently
contained all his travelling wardrobe, and wore thick shoes and
gaiters, his whole appearance being very un-Russian.

His black-haired neighbour inspected these peculiarities, having
nothing better to do, and at length remarked, with that rude enjoyment
of the discomforts of others which the common classes so often show:

“Cold?”

“Very,” said his neighbour, readily, “and this is a thaw, too. Fancy if
it had been a hard frost! I never thought it would be so cold in the
old country. I’ve grown quite out of the way of it.”

“What, been abroad, I suppose?”

“Yes, straight from Switzerland.”

“Wheugh! my goodness!” The black-haired young fellow whistled, and then
laughed.

The conversation proceeded. The readiness of the fair-haired young man
in the cloak to answer all his opposite neighbour’s questions was
surprising. He seemed to have no suspicion of any impertinence or
inappropriateness in the fact of such questions being put to him.
Replying to them, he made known to the inquirer that he certainly had
been long absent from Russia, more than four years; that he had been
sent abroad for his health; that he had suffered from some strange
nervous malady—a kind of epilepsy, with convulsive spasms. His
interlocutor burst out laughing several times at his answers; and more
than ever, when to the question, “whether he had been cured?” the
patient replied:

“No, they did not cure me.”

“Hey! that’s it! You stumped up your money for nothing, and we believe
in those fellows, here!” remarked the black-haired individual,
sarcastically.

“Gospel truth, sir, Gospel truth!” exclaimed another passenger, a
shabbily dressed man of about forty, who looked like a clerk, and
possessed a red nose and a very blotchy face. “Gospel truth! All they
do is to get hold of our good Russian money free, gratis, and for
nothing.”

“Oh, but you’re quite wrong in my particular instance,” said the Swiss
patient, quietly. “Of course I can’t argue the matter, because I know
only my own case; but my doctor gave me money—and he had very little—to
pay my journey back, besides having kept me at his own expense, while
there, for nearly two years.”

“Why? Was there no one else to pay for you?” asked the black-haired
one.

“No—Mr. Pavlicheff, who had been supporting me there, died a couple of
years ago. I wrote to Mrs. General Epanchin at the time (she is a
distant relative of mine), but she did not answer my letter. And so
eventually I came back.”

“And where have you come to?”

“That is—where am I going to stay? I—I really don’t quite know yet, I—”

Both the listeners laughed again.

“I suppose your whole set-up is in that bundle, then?” asked the first.

“I bet anything it is!” exclaimed the red-nosed passenger, with extreme
satisfaction, “and that he has precious little in the luggage
van!—though of course poverty is no crime—we must remember that!”

It appeared that it was indeed as they had surmised. The young fellow
hastened to admit the fact with wonderful readiness.

“Your bundle has some importance, however,” continued the clerk, when
they had laughed their fill (it was observable that the subject of
their mirth joined in the laughter when he saw them laughing); “for
though I dare say it is not stuffed full of friedrichs d’or and louis
d’or—judge from your costume and gaiters—still—if you can add to your
possessions such a valuable property as a relation like Mrs. General
Epanchin, then your bundle becomes a significant object at once. That
is, of course, if you really are a relative of Mrs. Epanchin’s, and
have not made a little error through—well, absence of mind, which is
very common to human beings; or, say—through a too luxuriant fancy?”

“Oh, you are right again,” said the fair-haired traveller, “for I
really am _almost_ wrong when I say she and I are related. She is
hardly a relation at all; so little, in fact, that I was not in the
least surprised to have no answer to my letter. I expected as much.”

“H’m! you spent your postage for nothing, then. H’m! you are candid,
however—and that is commendable. H’m! Mrs. Epanchin—oh yes! a most
eminent person. I know her. As for Mr. Pavlicheff, who supported you in
Switzerland, I know him too—at least, if it was Nicolai Andreevitch of
that name? A fine fellow he was—and had a property of four thousand
souls in his day.”

“Yes, Nicolai Andreevitch—that was his name,” and the young fellow
looked earnestly and with curiosity at the all-knowing gentleman with
the red nose.

This sort of character is met with pretty frequently in a certain
class. They are people who know everyone—that is, they know where a man
is employed, what his salary is, whom he knows, whom he married, what
money his wife had, who are his cousins, and second cousins, etc., etc.
These men generally have about a hundred pounds a year to live on, and
they spend their whole time and talents in the amassing of this style
of knowledge, which they reduce—or raise—to the standard of a science.

During the latter part of the conversation the black-haired young man
had become very impatient. He stared out of the window, and fidgeted,
and evidently longed for the end of the journey. He was very absent; he
would appear to listen—and heard nothing; and he would laugh of a
sudden, evidently with no idea of what he was laughing about.

“Excuse me,” said the red-nosed man to the young fellow with the
bundle, rather suddenly; “whom have I the honour to be talking to?”

“Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin,” replied the latter, with perfect
readiness.

“Prince Muishkin? Lef Nicolaievitch? H’m! I don’t know, I’m sure! I may
say I have never heard of such a person,” said the clerk, thoughtfully.
“At least, the name, I admit, is historical. Karamsin must mention the
family name, of course, in his history—but as an individual—one never
hears of any Prince Muishkin nowadays.”

“Of course not,” replied the prince; “there are none, except myself. I
believe I am the last and only one. As to my forefathers, they have
always been a poor lot; my own father was a sublieutenant in the army.
I don’t know how Mrs. Epanchin comes into the Muishkin family, but she
is descended from the Princess Muishkin, and she, too, is the last of
her line.”

“And did you learn science and all that, with your professor over
there?” asked the black-haired passenger.

“Oh yes—I did learn a little, but—”

“I’ve never learned anything whatever,” said the other.

“Oh, but I learned very little, you know!” added the prince, as though
excusing himself. “They could not teach me very much on account of my
illness.”

“Do you know the Rogojins?” asked his questioner, abruptly.

“No, I don’t—not at all! I hardly know anyone in Russia. Why, is that
your name?”

“Yes, I am Rogojin, Parfen Rogojin.”

“Parfen Rogojin? dear me—then don’t you belong to those very Rogojins,
perhaps—” began the clerk, with a very perceptible increase of civility
in his tone.

“Yes—those very ones,” interrupted Rogojin, impatiently, and with scant
courtesy. I may remark that he had not once taken any notice of the
blotchy-faced passenger, and had hitherto addressed all his remarks
direct to the prince.

“Dear me—is it possible?” observed the clerk, while his face assumed an
expression of great deference and servility—if not of absolute alarm:
“what, a son of that very Semen Rogojin—hereditary honourable
citizen—who died a month or so ago and left two million and a half of
roubles?”

“And how do _you_ know that he left two million and a half of roubles?”
asked Rogojin, disdainfully, and not deigning so much as to look at the
other. “However, it’s true enough that my father died a month ago, and
that here am I returning from Pskoff, a month after, with hardly a boot
to my foot. They’ve treated me like a dog! I’ve been ill of fever at
Pskoff the whole time, and not a line, nor farthing of money, have I
received from my mother or my confounded brother!”

“And now you’ll have a million roubles, at least—goodness gracious me!”
exclaimed the clerk, rubbing his hands.

“Five weeks since, I was just like yourself,” continued Rogojin,
addressing the prince, “with nothing but a bundle and the clothes I
wore. I ran away from my father and came to Pskoff to my aunt’s house,
where I caved in at once with fever, and he went and died while I was
away. All honour to my respected father’s memory—but he uncommonly
nearly killed me, all the same. Give you my word, prince, if I hadn’t
cut and run then, when I did, he’d have murdered me like a dog.”

“I suppose you angered him somehow?” asked the prince, looking at the
millionaire with considerable curiosity. But though there may have been
something remarkable in the fact that this man was heir to millions of
roubles there was something about him which surprised and interested
the prince more than that. Rogojin, too, seemed to have taken up the
conversation with unusual alacrity it appeared that he was still in a
considerable state of excitement, if not absolutely feverish, and was
in real need of someone to talk to for the mere sake of talking, as
safety-valve to his agitation.

As for his red-nosed neighbour, the latter—since the information as to
the identity of Rogojin—hung over him, seemed to be living on the honey
of his words and in the breath of his nostrils, catching at every
syllable as though it were a pearl of great price.

“Oh, yes; I angered him—I certainly did anger him,” replied Rogojin.
“But what puts me out so is my brother. Of course my mother couldn’t do
anything—she’s too old—and whatever brother Senka says is law for her!
But why couldn’t he let me know? He sent a telegram, they say. What’s
the good of a telegram? It frightened my aunt so that she sent it back
to the office unopened, and there it’s been ever since! It’s only
thanks to Konief that I heard at all; he wrote me all about it. He says
my brother cut off the gold tassels from my father’s coffin, at night
‘because they’re worth a lot of money!’ says he. Why, I can get him
sent off to Siberia for that alone, if I like; it’s sacrilege. Here,
you—scarecrow!” he added, addressing the clerk at his side, “is it
sacrilege or not, by law?”

“Sacrilege, certainly—certainly sacrilege,” said the latter.

“And it’s Siberia for sacrilege, isn’t it?”

“Undoubtedly so; Siberia, of course!”

“They will think that I’m still ill,” continued Rogojin to the prince,
“but I sloped off quietly, seedy as I was, took the train and came
away. Aha, brother Senka, you’ll have to open your gates and let me in,
my boy! I know he told tales about me to my father—I know that well
enough but I certainly did rile my father about Nastasia Philipovna
that’s very sure, and that was my own doing.”

“Nastasia Philipovna?” said the clerk, as though trying to think out
something.

“Come, you know nothing about _her_,” said Rogojin, impatiently.

“And supposing I do know something?” observed the other, triumphantly.

“Bosh! there are plenty of Nastasia Philipovnas. And what an
impertinent beast you are!” he added angrily. “I thought some creature
like you would hang on to me as soon as I got hold of my money.”

“Oh, but I do know, as it happens,” said the clerk in an aggravating
manner. “Lebedeff knows all about her. You are pleased to reproach me,
your excellency, but what if I prove that I am right after all?
Nastasia Philipovna’s family name is Barashkoff—I know, you see—and she
is a very well known lady, indeed, and comes of a good family, too. She
is connected with one Totski, Afanasy Ivanovitch, a man of considerable
property, a director of companies, and so on, and a great friend of
General Epanchin, who is interested in the same matters as he is.”

“My eyes!” said Rogojin, really surprised at last. “The devil take the
fellow, how does he know that?”

“Why, he knows everything—Lebedeff knows everything! I was a month or
two with Lihachof after his father died, your excellency, and while he
was knocking about—he’s in the debtor’s prison now—I was with him, and
he couldn’t do a thing without Lebedeff; and I got to know Nastasia
Philipovna and several people at that time.”

“Nastasia Philipovna? Why, you don’t mean to say that she and
Lihachof—” cried Rogojin, turning quite pale.

“No, no, no, no, no! Nothing of the sort, I assure you!” said Lebedeff,
hastily. “Oh dear no, not for the world! Totski’s the only man with any
chance there. Oh, no! He takes her to his box at the opera at the
French theatre of an evening, and the officers and people all look at
her and say, ‘By Jove, there’s the famous Nastasia Philipovna!’ but no
one ever gets any further than that, for there is nothing more to say.”

“Yes, it’s quite true,” said Rogojin, frowning gloomily; “so Zaleshoff
told me. I was walking about the Nefsky one fine day, prince, in my
father’s old coat, when she suddenly came out of a shop and stepped
into her carriage. I swear I was all of a blaze at once. Then I met
Zaleshoff—looking like a hair-dresser’s assistant, got up as fine as I
don’t know who, while I looked like a tinker. ‘Don’t flatter yourself,
my boy,’ said he; ‘she’s not for such as you; she’s a princess, she is,
and her name is Nastasia Philipovna Barashkoff, and she lives with
Totski, who wishes to get rid of her because he’s growing rather
old—fifty-five or so—and wants to marry a certain beauty, the loveliest
woman in all Petersburg.’ And then he told me that I could see Nastasia
Philipovna at the opera-house that evening, if I liked, and described
which was her box. Well, I’d like to see my father allowing any of us
to go to the theatre; he’d sooner have killed us, any day. However, I
went for an hour or so and saw Nastasia Philipovna, and I never slept a
wink all night after. Next morning my father happened to give me two
government loan bonds to sell, worth nearly five thousand roubles each.
‘Sell them,’ said he, ‘and then take seven thousand five hundred
roubles to the office, give them to the cashier, and bring me back the
rest of the ten thousand, without looking in anywhere on the way; look
sharp, I shall be waiting for you.’ Well, I sold the bonds, but I
didn’t take the seven thousand roubles to the office; I went straight
to the English shop and chose a pair of earrings, with a diamond the
size of a nut in each. They cost four hundred roubles more than I had,
so I gave my name, and they trusted me. With the earrings I went at
once to Zaleshoff’s. ‘Come on!’ I said, ‘come on to Nastasia
Philipovna’s,’ and off we went without more ado. I tell you I hadn’t a
notion of what was about me or before me or below my feet all the way;
I saw nothing whatever. We went straight into her drawing-room, and
then she came out to us.

“I didn’t say right out who I was, but Zaleshoff said: ‘From Parfen
Rogojin, in memory of his first meeting with you yesterday; be so kind
as to accept these!’

“She opened the parcel, looked at the earrings, and laughed.

“‘Thank your friend Mr. Rogojin for his kind attention,’ says she, and
bowed and went off. Why didn’t I die there on the spot? The worst of it
all was, though, that the beast Zaleshoff got all the credit of it! I
was short and abominably dressed, and stood and stared in her face and
never said a word, because I was shy, like an ass! And there was he all
in the fashion, pomaded and dressed out, with a smart tie on, bowing
and scraping; and I bet anything she took him for me all the while!

“‘Look here now,’ I said, when we came out, ‘none of your interference
here after this—do you understand?’ He laughed: ‘And how are you going
to settle up with your father?’ says he. I thought I might as well jump
into the Neva at once without going home first; but it struck me that I
wouldn’t, after all, and I went home feeling like one of the damned.”

“My goodness!” shivered the clerk. “And his father,” he added, for the
prince’s instruction, “and his father would have given a man a ticket
to the other world for ten roubles any day—not to speak of ten
thousand!”

The prince observed Rogojin with great curiosity; he seemed paler than
ever at this moment.

“What do you know about it?” cried the latter. “Well, my father learned
the whole story at once, and Zaleshoff blabbed it all over the town
besides. So he took me upstairs and locked me up, and swore at me for
an hour. ‘This is only a foretaste,’ says he; ‘wait a bit till night
comes, and I’ll come back and talk to you again.’

“Well, what do you think? The old fellow went straight off to Nastasia
Philipovna, touched the floor with his forehead, and began blubbering
and beseeching her on his knees to give him back the diamonds. So after
awhile she brought the box and flew out at him. ‘There,’ she says,
‘take your earrings, you wretched old miser; although they are ten
times dearer than their value to me now that I know what it must have
cost Parfen to get them! Give Parfen my compliments,’ she says, ‘and
thank him very much!’ Well, I meanwhile had borrowed twenty-five
roubles from a friend, and off I went to Pskoff to my aunt’s. The old
woman there lectured me so that I left the house and went on a drinking
tour round the public-houses of the place. I was in a high fever when I
got to Pskoff, and by nightfall I was lying delirious in the streets
somewhere or other!”

“Oho! we’ll make Nastasia Philipovna sing another song now!” giggled
Lebedeff, rubbing his hands with glee. “Hey, my boy, we’ll get her some
proper earrings now! We’ll get her such earrings that—”

“Look here,” cried Rogojin, seizing him fiercely by the arm, “look
here, if you so much as name Nastasia Philipovna again, I’ll tan your
hide as sure as you sit there!”

“Aha! do—by all means! if you tan my hide you won’t turn me away from
your society. You’ll bind me to you, with your lash, for ever. Ha, ha!
here we are at the station, though.”

Sure enough, the train was just steaming in as he spoke.

Though Rogojin had declared that he left Pskoff secretly, a large
collection of friends had assembled to greet him, and did so with
profuse waving of hats and shouting.

“Why, there’s Zaleshoff here, too!” he muttered, gazing at the scene
with a sort of triumphant but unpleasant smile. Then he suddenly turned
to the prince: “Prince, I don’t know why I have taken a fancy to you;
perhaps because I met you just when I did. But no, it can’t be that,
for I met this fellow” (nodding at Lebedeff) “too, and I have not taken
a fancy to him by any means. Come to see me, prince; we’ll take off
those gaiters of yours and dress you up in a smart fur coat, the best
we can buy. You shall have a dress coat, best quality, white waistcoat,
anything you like, and your pocket shall be full of money. Come, and
you shall go with me to Nastasia Philipovna’s. Now then will you come
or no?”

“Accept, accept, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch” said Lebedef solemnly;
“don’t let it slip! Accept, quick!”

Prince Muishkin rose and stretched out his hand courteously, while he
replied with some cordiality:

“I will come with the greatest pleasure, and thank you very much for
taking a fancy to me. I dare say I may even come today if I have time,
for I tell you frankly that I like you very much too. I liked you
especially when you told us about the diamond earrings; but I liked you
before that as well, though you have such a dark-clouded sort of face.
Thanks very much for the offer of clothes and a fur coat; I certainly
shall require both clothes and coat very soon. As for money, I have
hardly a copeck about me at this moment.”

“You shall have lots of money; by the evening I shall have plenty; so
come along!”

“That’s true enough, he’ll have lots before evening!” put in Lebedeff.

“But, look here, are you a great hand with the ladies? Let’s know that
first?” asked Rogojin.

“Oh no, oh no!” said the prince; “I couldn’t, you know—my illness—I
hardly ever saw a soul.”

“H’m! well—here, you fellow—you can come along with me now if you
like!” cried Rogojin to Lebedeff, and so they all left the carriage.

Lebedeff had his desire. He went off with the noisy group of Rogojin’s
friends towards the Voznesensky, while the prince’s route lay towards
the Litaynaya. It was damp and wet. The prince asked his way of
passers-by, and finding that he was a couple of miles or so from his
destination, he determined to take a droshky.

II.

General Epanchin lived in his own house near the Litaynaya. Besides
this large residence—five-sixths of which was let in flats and
lodgings—the general was owner of another enormous house in the
Sadovaya bringing in even more rent than the first. Besides these
houses he had a delightful little estate just out of town, and some
sort of factory in another part of the city. General Epanchin, as
everyone knew, had a good deal to do with certain government
monopolies; he was also a voice, and an important one, in many rich
public companies of various descriptions; in fact, he enjoyed the
reputation of being a well-to-do man of busy habits, many ties, and
affluent means. He had made himself indispensable in several quarters,
amongst others in his department of the government; and yet it was a
known fact that Fedor Ivanovitch Epanchin was a man of no education
whatever, and had absolutely risen from the ranks.

This last fact could, of course, reflect nothing but credit upon the
general; and yet, though unquestionably a sagacious man, he had his own
little weaknesses—very excusable ones,—one of which was a dislike to
any allusion to the above circumstance. He was undoubtedly clever. For
instance, he made a point of never asserting himself when he would gain
more by keeping in the background; and in consequence many exalted
personages valued him principally for his humility and simplicity, and
because “he knew his place.” And yet if these good people could only
have had a peep into the mind of this excellent fellow who “knew his
place” so well! The fact is that, in spite of his knowledge of the
world and his really remarkable abilities, he always liked to appear to
be carrying out other people’s ideas rather than his own. And also, his
luck seldom failed him, even at cards, for which he had a passion that
he did not attempt to conceal. He played for high stakes, and moved,
altogether, in very varied society.

As to age, General Epanchin was in the very prime of life; that is,
about fifty-five years of age,—the flowering time of existence, when
real enjoyment of life begins. His healthy appearance, good colour,
sound, though discoloured teeth, sturdy figure, preoccupied air during
business hours, and jolly good humour during his game at cards in the
evening, all bore witness to his success in life, and combined to make
existence a bed of roses to his excellency. The general was lord of a
flourishing family, consisting of his wife and three grown-up
daughters. He had married young, while still a lieutenant, his wife
being a girl of about his own age, who possessed neither beauty nor
education, and who brought him no more than fifty souls of landed
property, which little estate served, however, as a nest-egg for far
more important accumulations. The general never regretted his early
marriage, or regarded it as a foolish youthful escapade; and he so
respected and feared his wife that he was very near loving her. Mrs.
Epanchin came of the princely stock of Muishkin, which if not a
brilliant, was, at all events, a decidedly ancient family; and she was
extremely proud of her descent.

With a few exceptions, the worthy couple had lived through their long
union very happily. While still young the wife had been able to make
important friends among the aristocracy, partly by virtue of her family
descent, and partly by her own exertions; while, in after life, thanks
to their wealth and to the position of her husband in the service, she
took her place among the higher circles as by right.

During these last few years all three of the general’s
daughters—Alexandra, Adelaida, and Aglaya—had grown up and matured. Of
course they were only Epanchins, but their mother’s family was noble;
they might expect considerable fortunes; their father had hopes of
attaining to very high rank indeed in his country’s service—all of
which was satisfactory. All three of the girls were decidedly pretty,
even the eldest, Alexandra, who was just twenty-five years old. The
middle daughter was now twenty-three, while the youngest, Aglaya, was
twenty. This youngest girl was absolutely a beauty, and had begun of
late to attract considerable attention in society. But this was not
all, for every one of the three was clever, well educated, and
accomplished.

It was a matter of general knowledge that the three girls were very
fond of one another, and supported each other in every way; it was even
said that the two elder ones had made certain sacrifices for the sake
of the idol of the household, Aglaya. In society they not only disliked
asserting themselves, but were actually retiring. Certainly no one
could blame them for being too arrogant or haughty, and yet everybody
was well aware that they were proud and quite understood their own
value. The eldest was musical, while the second was a clever artist,
which fact she had concealed until lately. In a word, the world spoke
well of the girls; but they were not without their enemies, and
occasionally people talked with horror of the number of books they had
read.

They were in no hurry to marry. They liked good society, but were not
too keen about it. All this was the more remarkable, because everyone
was well aware of the hopes and aims of their parents.

It was about eleven o’clock in the forenoon when the prince rang the
bell at General Epanchin’s door. The general lived on the first floor
or flat of the house, as modest a lodging as his position permitted. A
liveried servant opened the door, and the prince was obliged to enter
into long explanations with this gentleman, who, from the first glance,
looked at him and his bundle with grave suspicion. At last, however, on
the repeated positive assurance that he really was Prince Muishkin, and
must absolutely see the general on business, the bewildered domestic
showed him into a little ante-chamber leading to a waiting-room that
adjoined the general’s study, there handing him over to another
servant, whose duty it was to be in this ante-chamber all the morning,
and announce visitors to the general. This second individual wore a
dress coat, and was some forty years of age; he was the general’s
special study servant, and well aware of his own importance.

“Wait in the next room, please; and leave your bundle here,” said the
door-keeper, as he sat down comfortably in his own easy-chair in the
ante-chamber. He looked at the prince in severe surprise as the latter
settled himself in another chair alongside, with his bundle on his
knees.

“If you don’t mind, I would rather sit here with you,” said the prince;
“I should prefer it to sitting in there.”

“Oh, but you can’t stay here. You are a visitor—a guest, so to speak.
Is it the general himself you wish to see?”

The man evidently could not take in the idea of such a shabby-looking
visitor, and had decided to ask once more.

“Yes—I have business—” began the prince.

“I do not ask you what your business may be, all I have to do is to
announce you; and unless the secretary comes in here I cannot do that.”

The man’s suspicions seemed to increase more and more. The prince was
too unlike the usual run of daily visitors; and although the general
certainly did receive, on business, all sorts and conditions of men,
yet in spite of this fact the servant felt great doubts on the subject
of this particular visitor. The presence of the secretary as an
intermediary was, he judged, essential in this case.

“Surely you—are from abroad?” he inquired at last, in a confused sort
of way. He had begun his sentence intending to say, “Surely you are not
Prince Muishkin, are you?”

“Yes, straight from the train! Did not you intend to say, ‘Surely you
are not Prince Muishkin?’ just now, but refrained out of politeness?”

“H’m!” grunted the astonished servant.

“I assure you I am not deceiving you; you shall not have to answer for
me. As to my being dressed like this, and carrying a bundle, there’s
nothing surprising in that—the fact is, my circumstances are not
particularly rosy at this moment.”

“H’m!—no, I’m not afraid of that, you see; I have to announce you,
that’s all. The secretary will be out directly—that is, unless you—yes,
that’s the rub—unless you—come, you must allow me to ask you—you’ve not
come to beg, have you?”

“Oh dear no, you can be perfectly easy on that score. I have quite
another matter on hand.”

“You must excuse my asking, you know. Your appearance led me to
think—but just wait for the secretary; the general is busy now, but the
secretary is sure to come out.”

“Oh—well, look here, if I have some time to wait, would you mind
telling me, is there any place about where I could have a smoke? I have
my pipe and tobacco with me.”

“_Smoke?_” said the man, in shocked but disdainful surprise, blinking
his eyes at the prince as though he could not believe his senses. “No,
sir, you cannot smoke here, and I wonder you are not ashamed of the
very suggestion. Ha, ha! a cool idea that, I declare!”

“Oh, I didn’t mean in this room! I know I can’t smoke here, of course.
I’d adjourn to some other room, wherever you like to show me to. You
see, I’m used to smoking a good deal, and now I haven’t had a puff for
three hours; however, just as you like.”

“Now how on earth am I to announce a man like that?” muttered the
servant. “In the first place, you’ve no right in here at all; you ought
to be in the waiting-room, because you’re a sort of visitor—a guest, in
fact—and I shall catch it for this. Look here, do you intend to take up
you abode with us?” he added, glancing once more at the prince’s
bundle, which evidently gave him no peace.

“No, I don’t think so. I don’t think I should stay even if they were to
invite me. I’ve simply come to make their acquaintance, and nothing
more.”

“Make their acquaintance?” asked the man, in amazement, and with
redoubled suspicion. “Then why did you say you had business with the
general?”

“Oh well, very little business. There is one little matter—some advice
I am going to ask him for; but my principal object is simply to
introduce myself, because I am Prince Muishkin, and Madame Epanchin is
the last of her branch of the house, and besides herself and me there
are no other Muishkins left.”

“What—you’re a relation then, are you?” asked the servant, so
bewildered that he began to feel quite alarmed.

“Well, hardly so. If you stretch a point, we are relations, of course,
but so distant that one cannot really take cognizance of it. I once
wrote to your mistress from abroad, but she did not reply. However, I
have thought it right to make acquaintance with her on my arrival. I am
telling you all this in order to ease your mind, for I see you are
still far from comfortable on my account. All you have to do is to
announce me as Prince Muishkin, and the object of my visit will be
plain enough. If I am received—very good; if not, well, very good
again. But they are sure to receive me, I should think; Madame Epanchin
will naturally be curious to see the only remaining representative of
her family. She values her Muishkin descent very highly, if I am
rightly informed.”

The prince’s conversation was artless and confiding to a degree, and
the servant could not help feeling that as from visitor to common
serving-man this state of things was highly improper. His conclusion
was that one of two things must be the explanation—either that this was
a begging impostor, or that the prince, if prince he were, was simply a
fool, without the slightest ambition; for a sensible prince with any
ambition would certainly not wait about in ante-rooms with servants,
and talk of his own private affairs like this. In either case, how was
he to announce this singular visitor?

“I really think I must request you to step into the next room!” he
said, with all the insistence he could muster.

“Why? If I had been sitting there now, I should not have had the
opportunity of making these personal explanations. I see you are still
uneasy about me and keep eyeing my cloak and bundle. Don’t you think
you might go in yourself now, without waiting for the secretary to come
out?”

“No, no! I can’t announce a visitor like yourself without the
secretary. Besides the general said he was not to be disturbed—he is
with the Colonel C—. Gavrila Ardalionovitch goes in without
announcing.”

“Who may that be? a clerk?”

“What? Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Oh no; he belongs to one of the
companies. Look here, at all events put your bundle down, here.”

“Yes, I will if I may; and—can I take off my cloak”

“Of course; you can’t go in _there_ with it on, anyhow.”

The prince rose and took off his mantle, revealing a neat enough
morning costume—a little worn, but well made. He wore a steel watch
chain and from this chain there hung a silver Geneva watch. Fool the
prince might be, still, the general’s servant felt that it was not
correct for him to continue to converse thus with a visitor, in spite
of the fact that the prince pleased him somehow.

“And what time of day does the lady receive?” the latter asked,
reseating himself in his old place.

“Oh, that’s not in _my_ province! I believe she receives at any time;
it depends upon the visitors. The dressmaker goes in at eleven. Gavrila
Ardalionovitch is allowed much earlier than other people, too; he is
even admitted to early lunch now and then.”

“It is much warmer in the rooms here than it is abroad at this season,”
observed the prince; “but it is much warmer there out of doors. As for
the houses—a Russian can’t live in them in the winter until he gets
accustomed to them.”

“Don’t they heat them at all?”

“Well, they do heat them a little; but the houses and stoves are so
different to ours.”

“H’m! were you long away?”

“Four years! and I was in the same place nearly all the time,—in one
village.”

“You must have forgotten Russia, hadn’t you?”

“Yes, indeed I had—a good deal; and, would you believe it, I often
wonder at myself for not having forgotten how to speak Russian? Even
now, as I talk to you, I keep saying to myself ‘how well I am speaking
it.’ Perhaps that is partly why I am so talkative this morning. I
assure you, ever since yesterday evening I have had the strongest
desire to go on and on talking Russian.”

“H’m! yes; did you live in Petersburg in former years?”

This good flunkey, in spite of his conscientious scruples, really could
not resist continuing such a very genteel and agreeable conversation.

“In Petersburg? Oh no! hardly at all, and now they say so much is
changed in the place that even those who did know it well are obliged
to relearn what they knew. They talk a good deal about the new law
courts, and changes there, don’t they?”

“H’m! yes, that’s true enough. Well now, how is the law over there, do
they administer it more justly than here?”

“Oh, I don’t know about that! I’ve heard much that is good about our
legal administration, too. There is no capital punishment here for one
thing.”

“Is there over there?”

“Yes—I saw an execution in France—at Lyons. Schneider took me over with
him to see it.”

“What, did they hang the fellow?”

“No, they cut off people’s heads in France.”

“What did the fellow do?—yell?”

“Oh no—it’s the work of an instant. They put a man inside a frame and a
sort of broad knife falls by machinery—they call the thing a
guillotine—it falls with fearful force and weight—the head springs off
so quickly that you can’t wink your eye in between. But all the
preparations are so dreadful. When they announce the sentence, you
know, and prepare the criminal and tie his hands, and cart him off to
the scaffold—that’s the fearful part of the business. The people all
crowd round—even women—though they don’t at all approve of women
looking on.”

“No, it’s not a thing for women.”

“Of course not—of course not!—bah! The criminal was a fine intelligent
fearless man; Le Gros was his name; and I may tell you—believe it or
not, as you like—that when that man stepped upon the scaffold he
_cried_, he did indeed,—he was as white as a bit of paper. Isn’t it a
dreadful idea that he should have cried—cried! Whoever heard of a grown
man crying from fear—not a child, but a man who never had cried
before—a grown man of forty-five years. Imagine what must have been
going on in that man’s mind at such a moment; what dreadful convulsions
his whole spirit must have endured; it is an outrage on the soul that’s
what it is. Because it is said ‘thou shalt not kill,’ is he to be
killed because he murdered some one else? No, it is not right, it’s an
impossible theory. I assure you, I saw the sight a month ago and it’s
dancing before my eyes to this moment. I dream of it, often.”

The prince had grown animated as he spoke, and a tinge of colour
suffused his pale face, though his way of talking was as quiet as ever.
The servant followed his words with sympathetic interest. Clearly he
was not at all anxious to bring the conversation to an end. Who knows?
Perhaps he too was a man of imagination and with some capacity for
thought.

“Well, at all events it is a good thing that there’s no pain when the
poor fellow’s head flies off,” he remarked.

“Do you know, though,” cried the prince warmly, “you made that remark
now, and everyone says the same thing, and the machine is designed with
the purpose of avoiding pain, this guillotine I mean; but a thought
came into my head then: what if it be a bad plan after all? You may
laugh at my idea, perhaps—but I could not help its occurring to me all
the same. Now with the rack and tortures and so on—you suffer terrible
pain of course; but then your torture is bodily pain only (although no
doubt you have plenty of that) until you die. But _here_ I should
imagine the most terrible part of the whole punishment is, not the
bodily pain at all—but the certain knowledge that in an hour,—then in
ten minutes, then in half a minute, then now—this very _instant_—your
soul must quit your body and that you will no longer be a man—and that
this is certain, _certain!_ That’s the point—the certainty of it. Just
that instant when you place your head on the block and hear the iron
grate over your head—then—that quarter of a second is the most awful of
all.

“This is not my own fantastical opinion—many people have thought the
same; but I feel it so deeply that I’ll tell you what I think. I
believe that to execute a man for murder is to punish him immeasurably
more dreadfully than is equivalent to his crime. A murder by sentence
is far more dreadful than a murder committed by a criminal. The man who
is attacked by robbers at night, in a dark wood, or anywhere,
undoubtedly hopes and hopes that he may yet escape until the very
moment of his death. There are plenty of instances of a man running
away, or imploring for mercy—at all events hoping on in some
degree—even after his throat was cut. But in the case of an execution,
that last hope—having which it is so immeasurably less dreadful to
die,—is taken away from the wretch and _certainty_ substituted in its
place! There is his sentence, and with it that terrible certainty that
he cannot possibly escape death—which, I consider, must be the most
dreadful anguish in the world. You may place a soldier before a
cannon’s mouth in battle, and fire upon him—and he will still hope. But
read to that same soldier his death-sentence, and he will either go mad
or burst into tears. Who dares to say that any man can suffer this
without going mad? No, no! it is an abuse, a shame, it is
unnecessary—why should such a thing exist? Doubtless there may be men
who have been sentenced, who have suffered this mental anguish for a
while and then have been reprieved; perhaps such men may have been able
to relate their feelings afterwards. Our Lord Christ spoke of this
anguish and dread. No! no! no! No man should be treated so, no man, no
man!”

The servant, though of course he could not have expressed all this as
the prince did, still clearly entered into it and was greatly
conciliated, as was evident from the increased amiability of his
expression. “If you are really very anxious for a smoke,” he remarked,
“I think it might possibly be managed, if you are very quick about it.
You see they might come out and inquire for you, and you wouldn’t be on
the spot. You see that door there? Go in there and you’ll find a little
room on the right; you can smoke there, only open the window, because I
ought not to allow it really, and—.” But there was no time, after all.

A young fellow entered the ante-room at this moment, with a bundle of
papers in his hand. The footman hastened to help him take off his
overcoat. The new arrival glanced at the prince out of the corners of
his eyes.

“This gentleman declares, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” began the man,
confidentially and almost familiarly, “that he is Prince Muishkin and a
relative of Madame Epanchin’s. He has just arrived from abroad, with
nothing but a bundle by way of luggage—.”

The prince did not hear the rest, because at this point the servant
continued his communication in a whisper.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch listened attentively, and gazed at the prince
with great curiosity. At last he motioned the man aside and stepped
hurriedly towards the prince.

“Are you Prince Muishkin?” he asked, with the greatest courtesy and
amiability.

He was a remarkably handsome young fellow of some twenty-eight summers,
fair and of middle height; he wore a small beard, and his face was most
intelligent. Yet his smile, in spite of its sweetness, was a little
thin, if I may so call it, and showed his teeth too evenly; his gaze
though decidedly good-humoured and ingenuous, was a trifle too
inquisitive and intent to be altogether agreeable.

“Probably when he is alone he looks quite different, and hardly smiles
at all!” thought the prince.

He explained about himself in a few words, very much the same as he had
told the footman and Rogojin beforehand.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch meanwhile seemed to be trying to recall
something.

“Was it not you, then, who sent a letter a year or less ago—from
Switzerland, I think it was—to Elizabetha Prokofievna (Mrs. Epanchin)?”

“It was.”

“Oh, then, of course they will remember who you are. You wish to see
the general? I’ll tell him at once—he will be free in a minute; but
you—you had better wait in the ante-chamber,—hadn’t you? Why is he
here?” he added, severely, to the man.

“I tell you, sir, he wished it himself!”

At this moment the study door opened, and a military man, with a
portfolio under his arm, came out talking loudly, and after bidding
good-bye to someone inside, took his departure.

“You there, Gania?” cried a voice from the study, “come in here, will
you?”

Gavrila Ardalionovitch nodded to the prince and entered the room
hastily.

A couple of minutes later the door opened again and the affable voice
of Gania cried:

“Come in please, prince!”

III.

General Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was standing in the middle of the
room, and gazed with great curiosity at the prince as he entered. He
even advanced a couple of steps to meet him.

The prince came forward and introduced himself.

“Quite so,” replied the general, “and what can I do for you?”

“Oh, I have no special business; my principal object was to make your
acquaintance. I should not like to disturb you. I do not know your
times and arrangements here, you see, but I have only just arrived. I
came straight from the station. I am come direct from Switzerland.”

The general very nearly smiled, but thought better of it and kept his
smile back. Then he reflected, blinked his eyes, stared at his guest
once more from head to foot; then abruptly motioned him to a chair, sat
down himself, and waited with some impatience for the prince to speak.

Gania stood at his table in the far corner of the room, turning over
papers.

“I have not much time for making acquaintances, as a rule,” said the
general, “but as, of course, you have your object in coming, I—”

“I felt sure you would think I had some object in view when I resolved
to pay you this visit,” the prince interrupted; “but I give you my
word, beyond the pleasure of making your acquaintance I had no personal
object whatever.”

“The pleasure is, of course, mutual; but life is not all pleasure, as
you are aware. There is such a thing as business, and I really do not
see what possible reason there can be, or what we have in common to—”

“Oh, there is no reason, of course, and I suppose there is nothing in
common between us, or very little; for if I am Prince Muishkin, and
your wife happens to be a member of my house, that can hardly be called
a ‘reason.’ I quite understand that. And yet that was my whole motive
for coming. You see I have not been in Russia for four years, and knew
very little about anything when I left. I had been very ill for a long
time, and I feel now the need of a few good friends. In fact, I have a
certain question upon which I much need advice, and do not know whom to
go to for it. I thought of your family when I was passing through
Berlin. ‘They are almost relations,’ I said to myself, ‘so I’ll begin
with them; perhaps we may get on with each other, I with them and they
with me, if they are kind people;’ and I have heard that you are very
kind people!”

“Oh, thank you, thank you, I’m sure,” replied the general, considerably
taken aback. “May I ask where you have taken up your quarters?”

“Nowhere, as yet.”

“What, straight from the station to my house? And how about your
luggage?”

“I only had a small bundle, containing linen, with me, nothing more. I
can carry it in my hand, easily. There will be plenty of time to take a
room in some hotel by the evening.”

“Oh, then you _do_ intend to take a room?”

“Of course.”

“To judge from your words, you came straight to my house with the
intention of staying there.”

“That could only have been on your invitation. I confess, however, that
I should not have stayed here even if you had invited me, not for any
particular reason, but because it is—well, contrary to my practice and
nature, somehow.”

“Oh, indeed! Then it is perhaps as well that I neither _did_ invite
you, nor _do_ invite you now. Excuse me, prince, but we had better make
this matter clear, once for all. We have just agreed that with regard
to our relationship there is not much to be said, though, of course, it
would have been very delightful to us to feel that such relationship
did actually exist; therefore, perhaps—”

“Therefore, perhaps I had better get up and go away?” said the prince,
laughing merrily as he rose from his place; just as merrily as though
the circumstances were by no means strained or difficult. “And I give
you my word, general, that though I know nothing whatever of manners
and customs of society, and how people live and all that, yet I felt
quite sure that this visit of mine would end exactly as it has ended
now. Oh, well, I suppose it’s all right; especially as my letter was
not answered. Well, good-bye, and forgive me for having disturbed you!”

The prince’s expression was so good-natured at this moment, and so
entirely free from even a suspicion of unpleasant feeling was the smile
with which he looked at the general as he spoke, that the latter
suddenly paused, and appeared to gaze at his guest from quite a new
point of view, all in an instant.

“Do you know, prince,” he said, in quite a different tone, “I do not
know you at all, yet, and after all, Elizabetha Prokofievna would very
likely be pleased to have a peep at a man of her own name. Wait a
little, if you don’t mind, and if you have time to spare?”

“Oh, I assure you I’ve lots of time, my time is entirely my own!” And
the prince immediately replaced his soft, round hat on the table. “I
confess, I thought Elizabetha Prokofievna would very likely remember
that I had written her a letter. Just now your servant—outside
there—was dreadfully suspicious that I had come to beg of you. I
noticed that! Probably he has very strict instructions on that score;
but I assure you I did not come to beg. I came to make some friends.
But I am rather bothered at having disturbed you; that’s all I care
about.—”

“Look here, prince,” said the general, with a cordial smile, “if you
really are the sort of man you appear to be, it may be a source of
great pleasure to us to make your better acquaintance; but, you see, I
am a very busy man, and have to be perpetually sitting here and signing
papers, or off to see his excellency, or to my department, or
somewhere; so that though I should be glad to see more of people, nice
people—you see, I—however, I am sure you are so well brought up that
you will see at once, and—but how old are you, prince?”

“Twenty-six.”

“No? I thought you very much younger.”

“Yes, they say I have a ‘young’ face. As to disturbing you I shall soon
learn to avoid doing that, for I hate disturbing people. Besides, you
and I are so differently constituted, I should think, that there must
be very little in common between us. Not that I will ever believe there
is _nothing_ in common between any two people, as some declare is the
case. I am sure people make a great mistake in sorting each other into
groups, by appearances; but I am boring you, I see, you—”

“Just two words: have you any means at all? Or perhaps you may be
intending to undertake some sort of employment? Excuse my questioning
you, but—”

“Oh, my dear sir, I esteem and understand your kindness in putting the
question. No; at present I have no means whatever, and no employment
either, but I hope to find some. I was living on other people abroad.
Schneider, the professor who treated me and taught me, too, in
Switzerland, gave me just enough money for my journey, so that now I
have but a few copecks left. There certainly is one question upon which
I am anxious to have advice, but—”

“Tell me, how do you intend to live now, and what are your plans?”
interrupted the general.

“I wish to work, somehow or other.”

“Oh yes, but then, you see, you are a philosopher. Have you any
talents, or ability in any direction—that is, any that would bring in
money and bread? Excuse me again—”

“Oh, don’t apologize. No, I don’t think I have either talents or
special abilities of any kind; on the contrary. I have always been an
invalid and unable to learn much. As for bread, I should think—”

The general interrupted once more with questions; while the prince
again replied with the narrative we have heard before. It appeared that
the general had known Pavlicheff; but why the latter had taken an
interest in the prince, that young gentleman could not explain;
probably by virtue of the old friendship with his father, he thought.

The prince had been left an orphan when quite a little child, and
Pavlicheff had entrusted him to an old lady, a relative of his own,
living in the country, the child needing the fresh air and exercise of
country life. He was educated, first by a governess, and afterwards by
a tutor, but could not remember much about this time of his life. His
fits were so frequent then, that they made almost an idiot of him (the
prince used the expression “idiot” himself). Pavlicheff had met
Professor Schneider in Berlin, and the latter had persuaded him to send
the boy to Switzerland, to Schneider’s establishment there, for the
cure of his epilepsy, and, five years before this time, the prince was
sent off. But Pavlicheff had died two or three years since, and
Schneider had himself supported the young fellow, from that day to
this, at his own expense. Although he had not quite cured him, he had
greatly improved his condition; and now, at last, at the prince’s own
desire, and because of a certain matter which came to the ears of the
latter, Schneider had despatched the young man to Russia.

The general was much astonished.

“Then you have no one, absolutely _no_ one in Russia?” he asked.

“No one, at present; but I hope to make friends; and then I have a
letter from—”

“At all events,” put in the general, not listening to the news about
the letter, “at all events, you must have learned _something_, and your
malady would not prevent your undertaking some easy work, in one of the
departments, for instance?”

“Oh dear no, oh no! As for a situation, I should much like to find one
for I am anxious to discover what I really am fit for. I have learned a
good deal in the last four years, and, besides, I read a great many
Russian books.”

“Russian books, indeed? Then, of course, you can read and write quite
correctly?”

“Oh dear, yes!”

“Capital! And your handwriting?”

“Ah, there I am _really_ talented! I may say I am a real caligraphist.
Let me write you something, just to show you,” said the prince, with
some excitement.

“With pleasure! In fact, it is very necessary. I like your readiness,
prince; in fact, I must say—I—I—like you very well, altogether,” said
the general.

“What delightful writing materials you have here, such a lot of pencils
and things, and what beautiful paper! It’s a charming room altogether.
I know that picture, it’s a Swiss view. I’m sure the artist painted it
from nature, and that I have seen the very place—”

“Quite likely, though I bought it here. Gania, give the prince some
paper. Here are pens and paper; now then, take this table. What’s
this?” the general continued to Gania, who had that moment taken a
large photograph out of his portfolio, and shown it to his senior.
“Halloa! Nastasia Philipovna! Did she send it you herself? Herself?” he
inquired, with much curiosity and great animation.

“She gave it me just now, when I called in to congratulate her. I asked
her for it long ago. I don’t know whether she meant it for a hint that
I had come empty-handed, without a present for her birthday, or what,”
added Gania, with an unpleasant smile.

“Oh, nonsense, nonsense,” said the general, with decision. “What
extraordinary ideas you have, Gania! As if she would hint; that’s not
her way at all. Besides, what could _you_ give her, without having
thousands at your disposal? You might have given her your portrait,
however. Has she ever asked you for it?”

“No, not yet. Very likely she never will. I suppose you haven’t
forgotten about tonight, have you, Ivan Fedorovitch? You were one of
those specially invited, you know.”

“Oh no, I remember all right, and I shall go, of course. I should think
so! She’s twenty-five years old today! And, you know, Gania, you must
be ready for great things; she has promised both myself and Afanasy
Ivanovitch that she will give a decided answer tonight, yes or no. So
be prepared!”

Gania suddenly became so ill at ease that his face grew paler than
ever.

“Are you sure she said that?” he asked, and his voice seemed to quiver
as he spoke.

“Yes, she promised. We both worried her so that she gave in; but she
wished us to tell you nothing about it until the day.”

The general watched Gania’s confusion intently, and clearly did not
like it.

“Remember, Ivan Fedorovitch,” said Gania, in great agitation, “that I
was to be free too, until her decision; and that even then I was to
have my ‘yes or no’ free.”

“Why, don’t you, aren’t you—” began the general, in alarm.

“Oh, don’t misunderstand—”

“But, my dear fellow, what are you doing, what do you mean?”

“Oh, I’m not rejecting her. I may have expressed myself badly, but I
didn’t mean that.”

“Reject her! I should think not!” said the general with annoyance, and
apparently not in the least anxious to conceal it. “Why, my dear
fellow, it’s not a question of your rejecting her, it is whether you
are prepared to receive her consent joyfully, and with proper
satisfaction. How are things going on at home?”

“At home? Oh, I can do as I like there, of course; only my father will
make a fool of himself, as usual. He is rapidly becoming a general
nuisance. I don’t ever talk to him now, but I hold him in check, safe
enough. I swear if it had not been for my mother, I should have shown
him the way out, long ago. My mother is always crying, of course, and
my sister sulks. I had to tell them at last that I intended to be
master of my own destiny, and that I expect to be obeyed at home. At
least, I gave my sister to understand as much, and my mother was
present.”

“Well, I must say, I cannot understand it!” said the general, shrugging
his shoulders and dropping his hands. “You remember your mother, Nina
Alexandrovna, that day she came and sat here and groaned—and when I
asked her what was the matter, she says, ‘Oh, it’s such a _dishonour_
to us!’ dishonour! Stuff and nonsense! I should like to know who can
reproach Nastasia Philipovna, or who can say a word of any kind against
her. Did she mean because Nastasia had been living with Totski? What
nonsense it is! You would not let her come near your daughters, says
Nina Alexandrovna. What next, I wonder? I don’t see how she can fail
to—to understand—”

“Her own position?” prompted Gania. “She does understand. Don’t be
annoyed with her. I have warned her not to meddle in other people’s
affairs. However, although there’s comparative peace at home at
present, the storm will break if anything is finally settled tonight.”

The prince heard the whole of the foregoing conversation, as he sat at
the table, writing. He finished at last, and brought the result of his
labour to the general’s desk.

“So this is Nastasia Philipovna,” he said, looking attentively and
curiously at the portrait. “How wonderfully beautiful!” he immediately
added, with warmth. The picture was certainly that of an unusually
lovely woman. She was photographed in a black silk dress of simple
design, her hair was evidently dark and plainly arranged, her eyes were
deep and thoughtful, the expression of her face passionate, but proud.
She was rather thin, perhaps, and a little pale. Both Gania and the
general gazed at the prince in amazement.

“How do you know it’s Nastasia Philipovna?” asked the general; “you
surely don’t know her already, do you?”

“Yes, I do! I have only been one day in Russia, but I have heard of the
great beauty!” And the prince proceeded to narrate his meeting with
Rogojin in the train and the whole of the latter’s story.

“There’s news!” said the general in some excitement, after listening to
the story with engrossed attention.

“Oh, of course it’s nothing but humbug!” cried Gania, a little
disturbed, however. “It’s all humbug; the young merchant was pleased to
indulge in a little innocent recreation! I have heard something of
Rogojin!”

“Yes, so have I!” replied the general. “Nastasia Philipovna told us all
about the earrings that very day. But now it is quite a different
matter. You see the fellow really has a million of roubles, and he is
passionately in love. The whole story smells of passion, and we all
know what this class of gentry is capable of when infatuated. I am much
afraid of some disagreeable scandal, I am indeed!”

“You are afraid of the million, I suppose,” said Gania, grinning and
showing his teeth.

“And you are _not_, I presume, eh?”

“How did he strike you, prince?” asked Gania, suddenly. “Did he seem to
be a serious sort of a man, or just a common rowdy fellow? What was
your own opinion about the matter?”

While Gania put this question, a new idea suddenly flashed into his
brain, and blazed out, impatiently, in his eyes. The general, who was
really agitated and disturbed, looked at the prince too, but did not
seem to expect much from his reply.

“I really don’t quite know how to tell you,” replied the prince, “but
it certainly did seem to me that the man was full of passion, and not,
perhaps, quite healthy passion. He seemed to be still far from well.
Very likely he will be in bed again in a day or two, especially if he
lives fast.”

“No! do you think so?” said the general, catching at the idea.

“Yes, I do think so!”

“Yes, but the sort of scandal I referred to may happen at any moment.
It may be this very evening,” remarked Gania to the general, with a
smile.

“Of course; quite so. In that case it all depends upon what is going on
in her brain at this moment.”

“You know the kind of person she is at times.”

“How? What kind of person is she?” cried the general, arrived at the
limits of his patience. “Look here, Gania, don’t you go annoying her
tonight. What you are to do is to be as agreeable towards her as ever
you can. Well, what are you smiling at? You must understand, Gania,
that I have no interest whatever in speaking like this. Whichever way
the question is settled, it will be to my advantage. Nothing will move
Totski from his resolution, so I run no risk. If there is anything I
desire, you must know that it is your benefit only. Can’t you trust me?
You are a sensible fellow, and I have been counting on you; for, in
this matter, that, that—”

“Yes, that’s the chief thing,” said Gania, helping the general out of
his difficulties again, and curling his lips in an envenomed smile,
which he did not attempt to conceal. He gazed with his fevered eyes
straight into those of the general, as though he were anxious that the
latter might read his thoughts.

The general grew purple with anger.

“Yes, of course it is the chief thing!” he cried, looking sharply at
Gania. “What a very curious man you are, Gania! You actually seem to be
_glad_ to hear of this millionaire fellow’s arrival—just as though you
wished for an excuse to get out of the whole thing. This is an affair
in which you ought to act honestly with both sides, and give due
warning, to avoid compromising others. But, even now, there is still
time. Do you understand me? I wish to know whether you desire this
arrangement or whether you do not? If not, say so,—and—and welcome! No
one is trying to force you into the snare, Gavrila Ardalionovitch, if
you see a snare in the matter, at least.”

“I do desire it,” murmured Gania, softly but firmly, lowering his eyes;
and he relapsed into gloomy silence.

The general was satisfied. He had excited himself, and was evidently
now regretting that he had gone so far. He turned to the prince, and
suddenly the disagreeable thought of the latter’s presence struck him,
and the certainty that he must have heard every word of the
conversation. But he felt at ease in another moment; it only needed one
glance at the prince to see that in that quarter there was nothing to
fear.

“Oh!” cried the general, catching sight of the prince’s specimen of
caligraphy, which the latter had now handed him for inspection. “Why,
this is simply beautiful; look at that, Gania, there’s real talent
there!”

On a sheet of thick writing-paper the prince had written in medieval
characters the legend:

“The gentle Abbot Pafnute signed this.”

“There,” explained the prince, with great delight and animation,
“there, that’s the abbot’s real signature—from a manuscript of the
fourteenth century. All these old abbots and bishops used to write most
beautifully, with such taste and so much care and diligence. Have you
no copy of Pogodin, general? If you had one I could show you another
type. Stop a bit—here you have the large round writing common in France
during the eighteenth century. Some of the letters are shaped quite
differently from those now in use. It was the writing current then, and
employed by public writers generally. I copied this from one of them,
and you can see how good it is. Look at the well-rounded a and d. I
have tried to translate the French character into the Russian letters—a
difficult thing to do, but I think I have succeeded fairly. Here is a
fine sentence, written in a good, original hand—‘Zeal triumphs over
all.’ That is the script of the Russian War Office. That is how
official documents addressed to important personages should be written.
The letters are round, the type black, and the style somewhat
remarkable. A stylist would not allow these ornaments, or attempts at
flourishes—just look at these unfinished tails!—but it has distinction
and really depicts the soul of the writer. He would like to give play
to his imagination, and follow the inspiration of his genius, but a
soldier is only at ease in the guard-room, and the pen stops half-way,
a slave to discipline. How delightful! The first time I met an example
of this handwriting, I was positively astonished, and where do you
think I chanced to find it? In Switzerland, of all places! Now that is
an ordinary English hand. It can hardly be improved, it is so refined
and exquisite—almost perfection. This is an example of another kind, a
mixture of styles. The copy was given me by a French commercial
traveller. It is founded on the English, but the downstrokes are a
little blacker, and more marked. Notice that the oval has some slight
modification—it is more rounded. This writing allows for flourishes;
now a flourish is a dangerous thing! Its use requires such taste, but,
if successful, what a distinction it gives to the whole! It results in
an incomparable type—one to fall in love with!”

“Dear me! How you have gone into all the refinements and details of the
question! Why, my dear fellow, you are not a caligraphist, you are an
artist! Eh, Gania?”

“Wonderful!” said Gania. “And he knows it too,” he added, with a
sarcastic smile.

“You may smile,—but there’s a career in this,” said the general. “You
don’t know what a great personage I shall show this to, prince. Why,
you can command a situation at thirty-five roubles per month to start
with. However, it’s half-past twelve,” he concluded, looking at his
watch; “so to business, prince, for I must be setting to work and shall
not see you again today. Sit down a minute. I have told you that I
cannot receive you myself very often, but I should like to be of some
assistance to you, some small assistance, of a kind that would give you
satisfaction. I shall find you a place in one of the State departments,
an easy place—but you will require to be accurate. Now, as to your
plans—in the house, or rather in the family of Gania here—my young
friend, whom I hope you will know better—his mother and sister have
prepared two or three rooms for lodgers, and let them to highly
recommended young fellows, with board and attendance. I am sure Nina
Alexandrovna will take you in on my recommendation. There you will be
comfortable and well taken care of; for I do not think, prince, that
you are the sort of man to be left to the mercy of Fate in a town like
Petersburg. Nina Alexandrovna, Gania’s mother, and Varvara
Alexandrovna, are ladies for whom I have the highest possible esteem
and respect. Nina Alexandrovna is the wife of General Ardalion
Alexandrovitch, my old brother in arms, with whom, I regret to say, on
account of certain circumstances, I am no longer acquainted. I give you
all this information, prince, in order to make it clear to you that I
am personally recommending you to this family, and that in so doing, I
am more or less taking upon myself to answer for you. The terms are
most reasonable, and I trust that your salary will very shortly prove
amply sufficient for your expenditure. Of course pocket-money is a
necessity, if only a little; do not be angry, prince, if I strongly
recommend you to avoid carrying money in your pocket. But as your purse
is quite empty at the present moment, you must allow me to press these
twenty-five roubles upon your acceptance, as something to begin with.
Of course we will settle this little matter another time, and if you
are the upright, honest man you look, I anticipate very little trouble
between us on that score. Taking so much interest in you as you may
perceive I do, I am not without my object, and you shall know it in
good time. You see, I am perfectly candid with you. I hope, Gania, you
have nothing to say against the prince’s taking up his abode in your
house?”

“Oh, on the contrary! my mother will be very glad,” said Gania,
courteously and kindly.

“I think only one of your rooms is engaged as yet, is it not? That
fellow Ferd-Ferd—”

“Ferdishenko.”

“Yes—I don’t like that Ferdishenko. I can’t understand why Nastasia
Philipovna encourages him so. Is he really her cousin, as he says?”

“Oh dear no, it’s all a joke. No more cousin than I am.”

“Well, what do you think of the arrangement, prince?”

“Thank you, general; you have behaved very kindly to me; all the more
so since I did not ask you to help me. I don’t say that out of pride. I
certainly did not know where to lay my head tonight. Rogojin asked me
to come to his house, of course, but—”

“Rogojin? No, no, my good fellow. I should strongly recommend you,
paternally,—or, if you prefer it, as a friend,—to forget all about
Rogojin, and, in fact, to stick to the family into which you are about
to enter.”

“Thank you,” began the prince; “and since you are so very kind there is
just one matter which I—”

“You must really excuse me,” interrupted the general, “but I positively
haven’t another moment now. I shall just tell Elizabetha Prokofievna
about you, and if she wishes to receive you at once—as I shall advise
her—I strongly recommend you to ingratiate yourself with her at the
first opportunity, for my wife may be of the greatest service to you in
many ways. If she cannot receive you now, you must be content to wait
till another time. Meanwhile you, Gania, just look over these accounts,
will you? We mustn’t forget to finish off that matter—”

The general left the room, and the prince never succeeded in broaching
the business which he had on hand, though he had endeavoured to do so
four times.

Gania lit a cigarette and offered one to the prince. The latter
accepted the offer, but did not talk, being unwilling to disturb
Gania’s work. He commenced to examine the study and its contents. But
Gania hardly so much as glanced at the papers lying before him; he was
absent and thoughtful, and his smile and general appearance struck the
prince still more disagreeably now that the two were left alone
together.

Suddenly Gania approached our hero who was at the moment standing over
Nastasia Philipovna’s portrait, gazing at it.

“Do you admire that sort of woman, prince?” he asked, looking intently
at him. He seemed to have some special object in the question.

“It’s a wonderful face,” said the prince, “and I feel sure that her
destiny is not by any means an ordinary, uneventful one. Her face is
smiling enough, but she must have suffered terribly—hasn’t she? Her
eyes show it—those two bones there, the little points under her eyes,
just where the cheek begins. It’s a proud face too, terribly proud! And
I—I can’t say whether she is good and kind, or not. Oh, if she be but
good! That would make all well!”

“And would you marry a woman like that, now?” continued Gania, never
taking his excited eyes off the prince’s face.

“I cannot marry at all,” said the latter. “I am an invalid.”

“Would Rogojin marry her, do you think?”

“Why not? Certainly he would, I should think. He would marry her
tomorrow!—marry her tomorrow and murder her in a week!”

Hardly had the prince uttered the last word when Gania gave such a
fearful shudder that the prince almost cried out.

“What’s the matter?” said he, seizing Gania’s hand.

“Your highness! His excellency begs your presence in her excellency’s
apartments!” announced the footman, appearing at the door.

The prince immediately followed the man out of the room.

IV.

All three of the Miss Epanchins were fine, healthy girls, well-grown,
with good shoulders and busts, and strong—almost masculine—hands; and,
of course, with all the above attributes, they enjoyed capital
appetites, of which they were not in the least ashamed.

Elizabetha Prokofievna sometimes informed the girls that they were a
little too candid in this matter, but in spite of their outward
deference to their mother these three young women, in solemn conclave,
had long agreed to modify the unquestioning obedience which they had
been in the habit of according to her; and Mrs. General Epanchin had
judged it better to say nothing about it, though, of course, she was
well aware of the fact.

It is true that her nature sometimes rebelled against these dictates of
reason, and that she grew yearly more capricious and impatient; but
having a respectful and well-disciplined husband under her thumb at all
times, she found it possible, as a rule, to empty any little
accumulations of spleen upon his head, and therefore the harmony of the
family was kept duly balanced, and things went as smoothly as family
matters can.

Mrs. Epanchin had a fair appetite herself, and generally took her share
of the capital mid-day lunch which was always served for the girls, and
which was nearly as good as a dinner. The young ladies used to have a
cup of coffee each before this meal, at ten o’clock, while still in
bed. This was a favourite and unalterable arrangement with them. At
half-past twelve, the table was laid in the small dining-room, and
occasionally the general himself appeared at the family gathering, if
he had time.

Besides tea and coffee, cheese, honey, butter, pan-cakes of various
kinds (the lady of the house loved these best), cutlets, and so on,
there was generally strong beef soup, and other substantial delicacies.

On the particular morning on which our story has opened, the family had
assembled in the dining-room, and were waiting the general’s
appearance, the latter having promised to come this day. If he had been
one moment late, he would have been sent for at once; but he turned up
punctually.

As he came forward to wish his wife good-morning and kiss her hands, as
his custom was, he observed something in her look which boded ill. He
thought he knew the reason, and had expected it, but still, he was not
altogether comfortable. His daughters advanced to kiss him, too, and
though they did not look exactly angry, there was something strange in
their expression as well.

The general was, owing to certain circumstances, a little inclined to
be too suspicious at home, and needlessly nervous; but, as an
experienced father and husband, he judged it better to take measures at
once to protect himself from any dangers there might be in the air.

However, I hope I shall not interfere with the proper sequence of my
narrative too much, if I diverge for a moment at this point, in order
to explain the mutual relations between General Epanchin’s family and
others acting a part in this history, at the time when we take up the
thread of their destiny. I have already stated that the general, though
he was a man of lowly origin, and of poor education, was, for all that,
an experienced and talented husband and father. Among other things, he
considered it undesirable to hurry his daughters to the matrimonial
altar and to worry them too much with assurances of his paternal wishes
for their happiness, as is the custom among parents of many grown-up
daughters. He even succeeded in ranging his wife on his side on this
question, though he found the feat very difficult to accomplish,
because unnatural; but the general’s arguments were conclusive, and
founded upon obvious facts. The general considered that the girls’
taste and good sense should be allowed to develop and mature
deliberately, and that the parents’ duty should merely be to keep
watch, in order that no strange or undesirable choice be made; but that
the selection once effected, both father and mother were bound from
that moment to enter heart and soul into the cause, and to see that the
matter progressed without hindrance until the altar should be happily
reached.

Besides this, it was clear that the Epanchins’ position gained each
year, with geometrical accuracy, both as to financial solidity and
social weight; and, therefore, the longer the girls waited, the better
was their chance of making a brilliant match.

But again, amidst the incontrovertible facts just recorded, one more,
equally significant, rose up to confront the family; and this was, that
the eldest daughter, Alexandra, had imperceptibly arrived at her
twenty-fifth birthday. Almost at the same moment, Afanasy Ivanovitch
Totski, a man of immense wealth, high connections, and good standing,
announced his intention of marrying. Afanasy Ivanovitch was a gentleman
of fifty-five years of age, artistically gifted, and of most refined
tastes. He wished to marry well, and, moreover, he was a keen admirer
and judge of beauty.

Now, since Totski had, of late, been upon terms of great cordiality
with Epanchin, which excellent relations were intensified by the fact
that they were, so to speak, partners in several financial enterprises,
it so happened that the former now put in a friendly request to the
general for counsel with regard to the important step he meditated.
Might he suggest, for instance, such a thing as a marriage between
himself and one of the general’s daughters?

Evidently the quiet, pleasant current of the family life of the
Epanchins was about to undergo a change.

The undoubted beauty of the family, _par excellence_, was the youngest,
Aglaya, as aforesaid. But Totski himself, though an egotist of the
extremest type, realized that he had no chance there; Aglaya was
clearly not for such as he.

Perhaps the sisterly love and friendship of the three girls had more or
less exaggerated Aglaya’s chances of happiness. In their opinion, the
latter’s destiny was not merely to be very happy; she was to live in a
heaven on earth. Aglaya’s husband was to be a compendium of all the
virtues, and of all success, not to speak of fabulous wealth. The two
elder sisters had agreed that all was to be sacrificed by them, if need
be, for Aglaya’s sake; her dowry was to be colossal and unprecedented.

The general and his wife were aware of this agreement, and, therefore,
when Totski suggested himself for one of the sisters, the parents made
no doubt that one of the two elder girls would probably accept the
offer, since Totski would certainly make no difficulty as to dowry. The
general valued the proposal very highly. He knew life, and realized
what such an offer was worth.

The answer of the sisters to the communication was, if not conclusive,
at least consoling and hopeful. It made known that the eldest,
Alexandra, would very likely be disposed to listen to a proposal.

Alexandra was a good-natured girl, though she had a will of her own.
She was intelligent and kind-hearted, and, if she were to marry Totski,
she would make him a good wife. She did not care for a brilliant
marriage; she was eminently a woman calculated to soothe and sweeten
the life of any man; decidedly pretty, if not absolutely handsome. What
better could Totski wish?

So the matter crept slowly forward. The general and Totski had agreed
to avoid any hasty and irrevocable step. Alexandra’s parents had not
even begun to talk to their daughters freely upon the subject, when
suddenly, as it were, a dissonant chord was struck amid the harmony of
the proceedings. Mrs. Epanchin began to show signs of discontent, and
that was a serious matter. A certain circumstance had crept in, a
disagreeable and troublesome factor, which threatened to overturn the
whole business.

This circumstance had come into existence eighteen years before. Close
to an estate of Totski’s, in one of the central provinces of Russia,
there lived, at that time, a poor gentleman whose estate was of the
wretchedest description. This gentleman was noted in the district for
his persistent ill-fortune; his name was Barashkoff, and, as regards
family and descent, he was vastly superior to Totski, but his estate
was mortgaged to the last acre. One day, when he had ridden over to the
town to see a creditor, the chief peasant of his village followed him
shortly after, with the news that his house had been burnt down, and
that his wife had perished with it, but his children were safe.

Even Barashkoff, inured to the storms of evil fortune as he was, could
not stand this last stroke. He went mad and died shortly after in the
town hospital. His estate was sold for the creditors; and the little
girls—two of them, of seven and eight years of age respectively,—were
adopted by Totski, who undertook their maintenance and education in the
kindness of his heart. They were brought up together with the children
of his German bailiff. Very soon, however, there was only one of them
left—Nastasia Philipovna—for the other little one died of
whooping-cough. Totski, who was living abroad at this time, very soon
forgot all about the child; but five years after, returning to Russia,
it struck him that he would like to look over his estate and see how
matters were going there, and, arrived at his bailiff’s house, he was
not long in discovering that among the children of the latter there now
dwelt a most lovely little girl of twelve, sweet and intelligent, and
bright, and promising to develop beauty of most unusual quality—as to
which last Totski was an undoubted authority.

He only stayed at his country seat a few days on this occasion, but he
had time to make his arrangements. Great changes took place in the
child’s education; a good governess was engaged, a Swiss lady of
experience and culture. For four years this lady resided in the house
with little Nastia, and then the education was considered complete. The
governess took her departure, and another lady came down to fetch
Nastia, by Totski’s instructions. The child was now transported to
another of Totski’s estates in a distant part of the country. Here she
found a delightful little house, just built, and prepared for her
reception with great care and taste; and here she took up her abode
together with the lady who had accompanied her from her old home. In
the house there were two experienced maids, musical instruments of all
sorts, a charming “young lady’s library,” pictures, paint-boxes, a
lap-dog, and everything to make life agreeable. Within a fortnight
Totski himself arrived, and from that time he appeared to have taken a
great fancy to this part of the world and came down each summer,
staying two and three months at a time. So passed four years peacefully
and happily, in charming surroundings.

At the end of that time, and about four months after Totski’s last
visit (he had stayed but a fortnight on this occasion), a report
reached Nastasia Philipovna that he was about to be married in St.
Petersburg, to a rich, eminent, and lovely woman. The report was only
partially true, the marriage project being only in an embryo condition;
but a great change now came over Nastasia Philipovna. She suddenly
displayed unusual decision of character; and without wasting time in
thought, she left her country home and came up to St. Petersburg,
straight to Totski’s house, all alone.

The latter, amazed at her conduct, began to express his displeasure;
but he very soon became aware that he must change his voice, style, and
everything else, with this young lady; the good old times were gone. An
entirely new and different woman sat before him, between whom and the
girl he had left in the country last July there seemed nothing in
common.

In the first place, this new woman understood a good deal more than was
usual for young people of her age; so much indeed, that Totski could
not help wondering where she had picked up her knowledge. Surely not
from her “young lady’s library”? It even embraced legal matters, and
the “world” in general, to a considerable extent.

Her character was absolutely changed. No more of the girlish
alternations of timidity and petulance, the adorable naivete, the
reveries, the tears, the playfulness... It was an entirely new and
hitherto unknown being who now sat and laughed at him, and informed him
to his face that she had never had the faintest feeling for him of any
kind, except loathing and contempt—contempt which had followed closely
upon her sensations of surprise and bewilderment after her first
acquaintance with him.

This new woman gave him further to understand that though it was
absolutely the same to her whom he married, yet she had decided to
prevent this marriage—for no particular reason, but that she _chose_ to
do so, and because she wished to amuse herself at his expense for that
it was “quite her turn to laugh a little now!”

Such were her words—very likely she did not give her real reason for
this eccentric conduct; but, at all events, that was all the
explanation she deigned to offer.

Meanwhile, Totski thought the matter over as well as his scattered
ideas would permit. His meditations lasted a fortnight, however, and at
the end of that time his resolution was taken. The fact was, Totski was
at that time a man of fifty years of age; his position was solid and
respectable; his place in society had long been firmly fixed upon safe
foundations; he loved himself, his personal comforts, and his position
better than all the world, as every respectable gentleman should!

At the same time his grasp of things in general soon showed Totski that
he now had to deal with a being who was outside the pale of the
ordinary rules of traditional behaviour, and who would not only
threaten mischief but would undoubtedly carry it out, and stop for no
one.

There was evidently, he concluded, something at work here; some storm
of the mind, some paroxysm of romantic anger, goodness knows against
whom or what, some insatiable contempt—in a word, something altogether
absurd and impossible, but at the same time most dangerous to be met
with by any respectable person with a position in society to keep up.

For a man of Totski’s wealth and standing, it would, of course, have
been the simplest possible matter to take steps which would rid him at
once from all annoyance; while it was obviously impossible for Nastasia
Philipovna to harm him in any way, either legally or by stirring up a
scandal, for, in case of the latter danger, he could so easily remove
her to a sphere of safety. However, these arguments would only hold
good in case of Nastasia acting as others might in such an emergency.
She was much more likely to overstep the bounds of reasonable conduct
by some extraordinary eccentricity.

Here the sound judgment of Totski stood him in good stead. He realized
that Nastasia Philipovna must be well aware that she could do nothing
by legal means to injure him, and that her flashing eyes betrayed some
entirely different intention.

Nastasia Philipovna was quite capable of ruining herself, and even of
perpetrating something which would send her to Siberia, for the mere
pleasure of injuring a man for whom she had developed so inhuman a
sense of loathing and contempt. He had sufficient insight to understand
that she valued nothing in the world—herself least of all—and he made
no attempt to conceal the fact that he was a coward in some respects.
For instance, if he had been told that he would be stabbed at the
altar, or publicly insulted, he would undoubtedly have been frightened;
but not so much at the idea of being murdered, or wounded, or insulted,
as at the thought that if such things were to happen he would be made
to look ridiculous in the eyes of society.

He knew well that Nastasia thoroughly understood him and where to wound
him and how, and therefore, as the marriage was still only in embryo,
Totski decided to conciliate her by giving it up. His decision was
strengthened by the fact that Nastasia Philipovna had curiously altered
of late. It would be difficult to conceive how different she was
physically, at the present time, to the girl of a few years ago. She
was pretty then... but now!... Totski laughed angrily when he thought
how short-sighted he had been. In days gone by he remembered how he had
looked at her beautiful eyes, how even then he had marvelled at their
dark mysterious depths, and at their wondering gaze which seemed to
seek an answer to some unknown riddle. Her complexion also had altered.
She was now exceedingly pale, but, curiously, this change only made her
more beautiful. Like most men of the world, Totski had rather despised
such a cheaply-bought conquest, but of late years he had begun to think
differently about it. It had struck him as long ago as last spring that
he ought to be finding a good match for Nastasia; for instance, some
respectable and reasonable young fellow serving in a government office
in another part of the country. How maliciously Nastasia laughed at the
idea of such a thing, now!

However, it appeared to Totski that he might make use of her in another
way; and he determined to establish her in St. Petersburg, surrounding
her with all the comforts and luxuries that his wealth could command.
In this way he might gain glory in certain circles.

Five years of this Petersburg life went by, and, of course, during that
time a great deal happened. Totski’s position was very uncomfortable;
having “funked” once, he could not totally regain his ease. He was
afraid, he did not know why, but he was simply _afraid_ of Nastasia
Philipovna. For the first two years or so he had suspected that she
wished to marry him herself, and that only her vanity prevented her
telling him so. He thought that she wanted him to approach her with a
humble proposal from his own side. But to his great, and not entirely
pleasurable amazement, he discovered that this was by no means the
case, and that were he to offer himself he would be refused. He could
not understand such a state of things, and was obliged to conclude that
it was pride, the pride of an injured and imaginative woman, which had
gone to such lengths that it preferred to sit and nurse its contempt
and hatred in solitude rather than mount to heights of hitherto
unattainable splendour. To make matters worse, she was quite impervious
to mercenary considerations, and could not be bribed in any way.

Finally, Totski took cunning means to try to break his chains and be
free. He tried to tempt her in various ways to lose her heart; he
invited princes, hussars, secretaries of embassies, poets, novelists,
even Socialists, to see her; but not one of them all made the faintest
impression upon Nastasia. It was as though she had a pebble in place of
a heart, as though her feelings and affections were dried up and
withered for ever.

She lived almost entirely alone; she read, she studied, she loved
music. Her principal acquaintances were poor women of various grades, a
couple of actresses, and the family of a poor schoolteacher. Among
these people she was much beloved.

She received four or five friends sometimes, of an evening. Totski
often came. Lately, too, General Epanchin had been enabled with great
difficulty to introduce himself into her circle. Gania made her
acquaintance also, and others were Ferdishenko, an ill-bred, and
would-be witty, young clerk, and Ptitsin, a money-lender of modest and
polished manners, who had risen from poverty. In fact, Nastasia
Philipovna’s beauty became a thing known to all the town; but not a
single man could boast of anything more than his own admiration for
her; and this reputation of hers, and her wit and culture and grace,
all confirmed Totski in the plan he had now prepared.

And it was at this moment that General Epanchin began to play so large
and important a part in the story.

When Totski had approached the general with his request for friendly
counsel as to a marriage with one of his daughters, he had made a full
and candid confession. He had said that he intended to stop at no means
to obtain his freedom; even if Nastasia were to promise to leave him
entirely alone in future, he would not (he said) believe and trust her;
words were not enough for him; he must have solid guarantees of some
sort. So he and the general determined to try what an attempt to appeal
to her heart would effect. Having arrived at Nastasia’s house one day,
with Epanchin, Totski immediately began to speak of the intolerable
torment of his position. He admitted that he was to blame for all, but
candidly confessed that he could not bring himself to feel any remorse
for his original guilt towards herself, because he was a man of sensual
passions which were inborn and ineradicable, and that he had no power
over himself in this respect; but that he wished, seriously, to marry
at last, and that the whole fate of the most desirable social union
which he contemplated, was in her hands; in a word, he confided his all
to her generosity of heart.

General Epanchin took up his part and spoke in the character of father
of a family; he spoke sensibly, and without wasting words over any
attempt at sentimentality, he merely recorded his full admission of her
right to be the arbiter of Totski’s destiny at this moment. He then
pointed out that the fate of his daughter, and very likely of both his
other daughters, now hung upon her reply.

To Nastasia’s question as to what they wished her to do, Totski
confessed that he had been so frightened by her, five years ago, that
he could never now be entirely comfortable until she herself married.
He immediately added that such a suggestion from him would, of course,
be absurd, unless accompanied by remarks of a more pointed nature. He
very well knew, he said, that a certain young gentleman of good family,
namely, Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin, with whom she was acquainted,
and whom she received at her house, had long loved her passionately,
and would give his life for some response from her. The young fellow
had confessed this love of his to him (Totski) and had also admitted it
in the hearing of his benefactor, General Epanchin. Lastly, he could
not help being of opinion that Nastasia must be aware of Gania’s love
for her, and if he (Totski) mistook not, she had looked with some
favour upon it, being often lonely, and rather tired of her present
life. Having remarked how difficult it was for him, of all people, to
speak to her of these matters, Totski concluded by saying that he
trusted Nastasia Philipovna would not look with contempt upon him if he
now expressed his sincere desire to guarantee her future by a gift of
seventy-five thousand roubles. He added that the sum would have been
left her all the same in his will, and that therefore she must not
consider the gift as in any way an indemnification to her for anything,
but that there was no reason, after all, why a man should not be
allowed to entertain a natural desire to lighten his conscience, etc.,
etc.; in fact, all that would naturally be said under the
circumstances. Totski was very eloquent all through, and, in
conclusion, just touched on the fact that not a soul in the world, not
even General Epanchin, had ever heard a word about the above
seventy-five thousand roubles, and that this was the first time he had
ever given expression to his intentions in respect to them.

Nastasia Philipovna’s reply to this long rigmarole astonished both the
friends considerably.

Not only was there no trace of her former irony, of her old hatred and
enmity, and of that dreadful laughter, the very recollection of which
sent a cold chill down Totski’s back to this very day; but she seemed
charmed and really glad to have the opportunity of talking seriously
with him for once in a way. She confessed that she had long wished to
have a frank and free conversation and to ask for friendly advice, but
that pride had hitherto prevented her; now, however, that the ice was
broken, nothing could be more welcome to her than this opportunity.

First, with a sad smile, and then with a twinkle of merriment in her
eyes, she admitted that such a storm as that of five years ago was now
quite out of the question. She said that she had long since changed her
views of things, and recognized that facts must be taken into
consideration in spite of the feelings of the heart. What was done was
done and ended, and she could not understand why Totski should still
feel alarmed.

She next turned to General Epanchin and observed, most courteously,
that she had long since known of his daughters, and that she had heard
none but good report; that she had learned to think of them with deep
and sincere respect. The idea alone that she could in any way serve
them, would be to her both a pride and a source of real happiness.

It was true that she was lonely in her present life; Totski had judged
her thoughts aright. She longed to rise, if not to love, at least to
family life and new hopes and objects, but as to Gavrila
Ardalionovitch, she could not as yet say much. She thought it must be
the case that he loved her; she felt that she too might learn to love
him, if she could be sure of the firmness of his attachment to herself;
but he was very young, and it was a difficult question to decide. What
she specially liked about him was that he worked, and supported his
family by his toil.

She had heard that he was proud and ambitious; she had heard much that
was interesting of his mother and sister, she had heard of them from
Mr. Ptitsin, and would much like to make their acquaintance,
but—another question!—would they like to receive her into their house?
At all events, though she did not reject the idea of this marriage, she
desired not to be hurried. As for the seventy-five thousand roubles,
Mr. Totski need not have found any difficulty or awkwardness about the
matter; she quite understood the value of money, and would, of course,
accept the gift. She thanked him for his delicacy, however, but saw no
reason why Gavrila Ardalionovitch should not know about it.

She would not marry the latter, she said, until she felt persuaded that
neither on his part nor on the part of his family did there exist any
sort of concealed suspicions as to herself. She did not intend to ask
forgiveness for anything in the past, which fact she desired to be
known. She did not consider herself to blame for anything that had
happened in former years, and she thought that Gavrila Ardalionovitch
should be informed as to the relations which had existed between
herself and Totski during the last five years. If she accepted this
money it was not to be considered as indemnification for her misfortune
as a young girl, which had not been in any degree her own fault, but
merely as compensation for her ruined life.

She became so excited and agitated during all these explanations and
confessions that General Epanchin was highly gratified, and considered
the matter satisfactorily arranged once for all. But the once bitten
Totski was twice shy, and looked for hidden snakes among the flowers.
However, the special point to which the two friends particularly
trusted to bring about their object (namely, Gania’s attractiveness for
Nastasia Philipovna), stood out more and more prominently; the
pourparlers had commenced, and gradually even Totski began to believe
in the possibility of success.

Before long Nastasia and Gania had talked the matter over. Very little
was said—her modesty seemed to suffer under the infliction of
discussing such a question. But she recognized his love, on the
understanding that she bound herself to nothing whatever, and that she
reserved the right to say “no” up to the very hour of the marriage
ceremony. Gania was to have the same right of refusal at the last
moment.

It soon became clear to Gania, after scenes of wrath and quarrellings
at the domestic hearth, that his family were seriously opposed to the
match, and that Nastasia was aware of this fact was equally evident.
She said nothing about it, though he daily expected her to do so.

There were several rumours afloat, before long, which upset Totski’s
equanimity a good deal, but we will not now stop to describe them;
merely mentioning an instance or two. One was that Nastasia had entered
into close and secret relations with the Epanchin girls—a most unlikely
rumour; another was that Nastasia had long satisfied herself of the
fact that Gania was merely marrying her for money, and that his nature
was gloomy and greedy, impatient and selfish, to an extraordinary
degree; and that although he had been keen enough in his desire to
achieve a conquest before, yet since the two friends had agreed to
exploit his passion for their own purposes, it was clear enough that he
had begun to consider the whole thing a nuisance and a nightmare.

In his heart passion and hate seemed to hold divided sway, and although
he had at last given his consent to marry the woman (as he said), under
the stress of circumstances, yet he promised himself that he would
“take it out of her,” after marriage.

Nastasia seemed to Totski to have divined all this, and to be preparing
something on her own account, which frightened him to such an extent
that he did not dare communicate his views even to the general. But at
times he would pluck up his courage and be full of hope and good
spirits again, acting, in fact, as weak men do act in such
circumstances.

However, both the friends felt that the thing looked rosy indeed when
one day Nastasia informed them that she would give her final answer on
the evening of her birthday, which anniversary was due in a very short
time.

A strange rumour began to circulate, meanwhile; no less than that the
respectable and highly respected General Epanchin was himself so
fascinated by Nastasia Philipovna that his feeling for her amounted
almost to passion. What he thought to gain by Gania’s marriage to the
girl it was difficult to imagine. Possibly he counted on Gania’s
complaisance; for Totski had long suspected that there existed some
secret understanding between the general and his secretary. At all
events the fact was known that he had prepared a magnificent present of
pearls for Nastasia’s birthday, and that he was looking forward to the
occasion when he should present his gift with the greatest excitement
and impatience. The day before her birthday he was in a fever of
agitation.

Mrs. Epanchin, long accustomed to her husband’s infidelities, had heard
of the pearls, and the rumour excited her liveliest curiosity and
interest. The general remarked her suspicions, and felt that a grand
explanation must shortly take place—which fact alarmed him much.

This is the reason why he was so unwilling to take lunch (on the
morning upon which we took up this narrative) with the rest of his
family. Before the prince’s arrival he had made up his mind to plead
business, and “cut” the meal; which simply meant running away.

He was particularly anxious that this one day should be
passed—especially the evening—without unpleasantness between himself
and his family; and just at the right moment the prince turned up—“as
though Heaven had sent him on purpose,” said the general to himself, as
he left the study to seek out the wife of his bosom.

V.

Mrs. General Epanchin was a proud woman by nature. What must her
feelings have been when she heard that Prince Muishkin, the last of his
and her line, had arrived in beggar’s guise, a wretched idiot, a
recipient of charity—all of which details the general gave out for
greater effect! He was anxious to steal her interest at the first
swoop, so as to distract her thoughts from other matters nearer home.

Mrs. Epanchin was in the habit of holding herself very straight, and
staring before her, without speaking, in moments of excitement.

She was a fine woman of the same age as her husband, with a slightly
hooked nose, a high, narrow forehead, thick hair turning a little grey,
and a sallow complexion. Her eyes were grey and wore a very curious
expression at times. She believed them to be most effective—a belief
that nothing could alter.

“What, receive him! Now, at once?” asked Mrs. Epanchin, gazing vaguely
at her husband as he stood fidgeting before her.

“Oh, dear me, I assure you there is no need to stand on ceremony with
him,” the general explained hastily. “He is quite a child, not to say a
pathetic-looking creature. He has fits of some sort, and has just
arrived from Switzerland, straight from the station, dressed like a
German and without a farthing in his pocket. I gave him twenty-five
roubles to go on with, and am going to find him some easy place in one
of the government offices. I should like you to ply him well with the
victuals, my dears, for I should think he must be very hungry.”

“You astonish me,” said the lady, gazing as before. “Fits, and hungry
too! What sort of fits?”

“Oh, they don’t come on frequently, besides, he’s a regular child,
though he seems to be fairly educated. I should like you, if possible,
my dears,” the general added, making slowly for the door, “to put him
through his paces a bit, and see what he is good for. I think you
should be kind to him; it is a good deed, you know—however, just as you
like, of course—but he is a sort of relation, remember, and I thought
it might interest you to see the young fellow, seeing that this is so.”

“Oh, of course, mamma, if we needn’t stand on ceremony with him, we
must give the poor fellow something to eat after his journey;
especially as he has not the least idea where to go to,” said
Alexandra, the eldest of the girls.

“Besides, he’s quite a child; we can entertain him with a little
hide-and-seek, in case of need,” said Adelaida.

“Hide-and-seek? What do you mean?” inquired Mrs. Epanchin.

“Oh, do stop pretending, mamma,” cried Aglaya, in vexation. “Send him
up, father; mother allows.”

The general rang the bell and gave orders that the prince should be
shown in.

“Only on condition that he has a napkin under his chin at lunch, then,”
said Mrs. Epanchin, “and let Fedor, or Mavra, stand behind him while he
eats. Is he quiet when he has these fits? He doesn’t show violence,
does he?”

“On the contrary, he seems to be very well brought up. His manners are
excellent—but here he is himself. Here you are, prince—let me introduce
you, the last of the Muishkins, a relative of your own, my dear, or at
least of the same name. Receive him kindly, please. They’ll bring in
lunch directly, prince; you must stop and have some, but you must
excuse me. I’m in a hurry, I must be off—”

“We all know where _you_ must be off to!” said Mrs. Epanchin, in a
meaning voice.

“Yes, yes—I must hurry away, I’m late! Look here, dears, let him write
you something in your albums; you’ve no idea what a wonderful
caligraphist he is, wonderful talent! He has just written out ‘Abbot
Pafnute signed this’ for me. Well, _au revoir!_”

“Stop a minute; where are you off to? Who is this abbot?” cried Mrs.
Epanchin to her retreating husband in a tone of excited annoyance.

“Yes, my dear, it was an old abbot of that name—I must be off to see
the count, he’s waiting for me, I’m late—Good-bye! _Au revoir_,
prince!”—and the general bolted at full speed.

“Oh, yes—I know what count you’re going to see!” remarked his wife in a
cutting manner, as she turned her angry eyes on the prince. “Now then,
what’s all this about?—What abbot—Who’s Pafnute?” she added, brusquely.

“Mamma!” said Alexandra, shocked at her rudeness.

Aglaya stamped her foot.

“Nonsense! Let me alone!” said the angry mother. “Now then, prince, sit
down here, no, nearer, come nearer the light! I want to have a good
look at you. So, now then, who is this abbot?”

“Abbot Pafnute,” said our friend, seriously and with deference.

“Pafnute, yes. And who was he?”

Mrs. Epanchin put these questions hastily and brusquely, and when the
prince answered she nodded her head sagely at each word he said.

“The Abbot Pafnute lived in the fourteenth century,” began the prince;
“he was in charge of one of the monasteries on the Volga, about where
our present Kostroma government lies. He went to Oreol and helped in
the great matters then going on in the religious world; he signed an
edict there, and I have seen a print of his signature; it struck me, so
I copied it. When the general asked me, in his study, to write
something for him, to show my handwriting, I wrote ‘The Abbot Pafnute
signed this,’ in the exact handwriting of the abbot. The general liked
it very much, and that’s why he recalled it just now.”

“Aglaya, make a note of ‘Pafnute,’ or we shall forget him. H’m! and
where is this signature?”

“I think it was left on the general’s table.”

“Let it be sent for at once!”

“Oh, I’ll write you a new one in half a minute,” said the prince, “if
you like!”

“Of course, mamma!” said Alexandra. “But let’s have lunch now, we are
all hungry!”

“Yes; come along, prince,” said the mother, “are you very hungry?”

“Yes; I must say that I am pretty hungry, thanks very much.”

“H’m! I like to see that you know your manners; and you are by no means
such a person as the general thought fit to describe you. Come along;
you sit here, opposite to me,” she continued, “I wish to be able to see
your face. Alexandra, Adelaida, look after the prince! He doesn’t seem
so very ill, does he? I don’t think he requires a napkin under his
chin, after all; are you accustomed to having one on, prince?”

“Formerly, when I was seven years old or so. I believe I wore one; but
now I usually hold my napkin on my knee when I eat.”

“Of course, of course! And about your fits?”

“Fits?” asked the prince, slightly surprised. “I very seldom have fits
nowadays. I don’t know how it may be here, though; they say the climate
may be bad for me.”

“He talks very well, you know!” said Mrs. Epanchin, who still continued
to nod at each word the prince spoke. “I really did not expect it at
all; in fact, I suppose it was all stuff and nonsense on the general’s
part, as usual. Eat away, prince, and tell me where you were born, and
where you were brought up. I wish to know all about you, you interest
me very much!”

The prince expressed his thanks once more, and eating heartily the
while, recommenced the narrative of his life in Switzerland, all of
which we have heard before. Mrs. Epanchin became more and more pleased
with her guest; the girls, too, listened with considerable attention.
In talking over the question of relationship it turned out that the
prince was very well up in the matter and knew his pedigree off by
heart. It was found that scarcely any connection existed between
himself and Mrs. Epanchin, but the talk, and the opportunity of
conversing about her family tree, gratified the latter exceedingly, and
she rose from the table in great good humour.

“Let’s all go to my boudoir,” she said, “and they shall bring some
coffee in there. That’s the room where we all assemble and busy
ourselves as we like best,” she explained. “Alexandra, my eldest, here,
plays the piano, or reads or sews; Adelaida paints landscapes and
portraits (but never finishes any); and Aglaya sits and does nothing. I
don’t work too much, either. Here we are, now; sit down, prince, near
the fire and talk to us. I want to hear you relate something. I wish to
make sure of you first and then tell my old friend, Princess
Bielokonski, about you. I wish you to know all the good people and to
interest them. Now then, begin!”

“Mamma, it’s rather a strange order, that!” said Adelaida, who was
fussing among her paints and paint-brushes at the easel. Aglaya and
Alexandra had settled themselves with folded hands on a sofa, evidently
meaning to be listeners. The prince felt that the general attention was
concentrated upon himself.

“I should refuse to say a word if _I_ were ordered to tell a story like
that!” observed Aglaya.

“Why? what’s there strange about it? He has a tongue. Why shouldn’t he
tell us something? I want to judge whether he is a good story-teller;
anything you like, prince—how you liked Switzerland, what was your
first impression, anything. You’ll see, he’ll begin directly and tell
us all about it beautifully.”

“The impression was forcible—” the prince began.

“There, you see, girls,” said the impatient lady, “he _has_ begun, you
see.”

“Well, then, _let_ him talk, mamma,” said Alexandra. “This prince is a
great humbug and by no means an idiot,” she whispered to Aglaya.

“Oh, I saw that at once,” replied the latter. “I don’t think it at all
nice of him to play a part. What does he wish to gain by it, I wonder?”

“My first impression was a very strong one,” repeated the prince. “When
they took me away from Russia, I remember I passed through many German
towns and looked out of the windows, but did not trouble so much as to
ask questions about them. This was after a long series of fits. I
always used to fall into a sort of torpid condition after such a
series, and lost my memory almost entirely; and though I was not
altogether without reason at such times, yet I had no logical power of
thought. This would continue for three or four days, and then I would
recover myself again. I remember my melancholy was intolerable; I felt
inclined to cry; I sat and wondered and wondered uncomfortably; the
consciousness that everything was strange weighed terribly upon me; I
could understand that it was all foreign and strange. I recollect I
awoke from this state for the first time at Basle, one evening; the
bray of a donkey aroused me, a donkey in the town market. I saw the
donkey and was extremely pleased with it, and from that moment my head
seemed to clear.”

“A donkey? How strange! Yet it is not strange. Anyone of us might fall
in love with a donkey! It happened in mythological times,” said Madame
Epanchin, looking wrathfully at her daughters, who had begun to laugh.
“Go on, prince.”

“Since that evening I have been specially fond of donkeys. I began to
ask questions about them, for I had never seen one before; and I at
once came to the conclusion that this must be one of the most useful of
animals—strong, willing, patient, cheap; and, thanks to this donkey, I
began to like the whole country I was travelling through; and my
melancholy passed away.”

“All this is very strange and interesting,” said Mrs. Epanchin. “Now
let’s leave the donkey and go on to other matters. What are you
laughing at, Aglaya? and you too, Adelaida? The prince told us his
experiences very cleverly; he saw the donkey himself, and what have you
ever seen? _You_ have never been abroad.”

“I have seen a donkey though, mamma!” said Aglaya.

“And I’ve heard one!” said Adelaida. All three of the girls laughed out
loud, and the prince laughed with them.

“Well, it’s too bad of you,” said mamma. “You must forgive them,
prince; they are good girls. I am very fond of them, though I often
have to be scolding them; they are all as silly and mad as march
hares.”

“Oh, why shouldn’t they laugh?” said the prince. “I shouldn’t have let
the chance go by in their place, I know. But I stick up for the donkey,
all the same; he’s a patient, good-natured fellow.”

“Are you a patient man, prince? I ask out of curiosity,” said Mrs.
Epanchin.

All laughed again.

“Oh, that wretched donkey again, I see!” cried the lady. “I assure you,
prince, I was not guilty of the least—”

“Insinuation? Oh! I assure you, I take your word for it.” And the
prince continued laughing merrily.

“I must say it’s very nice of you to laugh. I see you really are a
kind-hearted fellow,” said Mrs. Epanchin.

“I’m not always kind, though.”

“I am kind myself, and _always_ kind too, if you please!” she retorted,
unexpectedly; “and that is my chief fault, for one ought not to be
always kind. I am often angry with these girls and their father; but
the worst of it is, I am always kindest when I am cross. I was very
angry just before you came, and Aglaya there read me a lesson—thanks,
Aglaya, dear—come and kiss me—there—that’s enough” she added, as Aglaya
came forward and kissed her lips and then her hand. “Now then, go on,
prince. Perhaps you can think of something more exciting than about the
donkey, eh?”

“I must say, again, _I_ can’t understand how you can expect anyone to
tell you stories straight away, so,” said Adelaida. “I know I never
could!”

“Yes, but the prince can, because he is clever—cleverer than you are by
ten or twenty times, if you like. There, that’s so, prince; and
seriously, let’s drop the donkey now—what else did you see abroad,
besides the donkey?”

“Yes, but the prince told us about the donkey very cleverly, all the
same,” said Alexandra. “I have always been most interested to hear how
people go mad and get well again, and that sort of thing. Especially
when it happens suddenly.”

“Quite so, quite so!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, delighted. “I see you _can_
be sensible now and then, Alexandra. You were speaking of Switzerland,
prince?”

“Yes. We came to Lucerne, and I was taken out in a boat. I felt how
lovely it was, but the loveliness weighed upon me somehow or other, and
made me feel melancholy.”

“Why?” asked Alexandra.

“I don’t know; I always feel like that when I look at the beauties of
nature for the first time; but then, I was ill at that time, of
course!”

“Oh, but I should like to see it!” said Adelaida; “and I don’t know
_when_ we shall ever go abroad. I’ve been two years looking out for a
good subject for a picture. I’ve done all I know. ‘The North and South
I know by heart,’ as our poet observes. Do help me to a subject,
prince.”

“Oh, but I know nothing about painting. It seems to me one only has to
look, and paint what one sees.”

“But I don’t know _how_ to see!”

“Nonsense, what rubbish you talk!” the mother struck in. “Not know how
to see! Open your eyes and look! If you can’t see here, you won’t see
abroad either. Tell us what you saw yourself, prince!”

“Yes, that’s better,” said Adelaida; “the prince _learned to see_
abroad.”

“Oh, I hardly know! You see, I only went to restore my health. I don’t
know whether I learned to see, exactly. I was very happy, however,
nearly all the time.”

“Happy! you can be happy?” cried Aglaya. “Then how can you say you did
not learn to see? I should think you could teach _us_ to see!”

“Oh! _do_ teach us,” laughed Adelaida.

“Oh! I can’t do that,” said the prince, laughing too. “I lived almost
all the while in one little Swiss village; what can I teach you? At
first I was only just not absolutely dull; then my health began to
improve—then every day became dearer and more precious to me, and the
longer I stayed, the dearer became the time to me; so much so that I
could not help observing it; but why this was so, it would be difficult
to say.”

“So that you didn’t care to go away anywhere else?”

“Well, at first I did; I was restless; I didn’t know however I should
manage to support life—you know there are such moments, especially in
solitude. There was a waterfall near us, such a lovely thin streak of
water, like a thread but white and moving. It fell from a great height,
but it looked quite low, and it was half a mile away, though it did not
seem fifty paces. I loved to listen to it at night, but it was then
that I became so restless. Sometimes I went and climbed the mountain
and stood there in the midst of the tall pines, all alone in the
terrible silence, with our little village in the distance, and the sky
so blue, and the sun so bright, and an old ruined castle on the
mountain-side, far away. I used to watch the line where earth and sky
met, and longed to go and seek there the key of all mysteries, thinking
that I might find there a new life, perhaps some great city where life
should be grander and richer—and then it struck me that life may be
grand enough even in a prison.”

“I read that last most praiseworthy thought in my manual, when I was
twelve years old,” said Aglaya.

“All this is pure philosophy,” said Adelaida. “You are a philosopher,
prince, and have come here to instruct us in your views.”

“Perhaps you are right,” said the prince, smiling. “I think I am a
philosopher, perhaps, and who knows, perhaps I do wish to teach my
views of things to those I meet with?”

“Your philosophy is rather like that of an old woman we know, who is
rich and yet does nothing but try how little she can spend. She talks
of nothing but money all day. Your great philosophical idea of a grand
life in a prison and your four happy years in that Swiss village are
like this, rather,” said Aglaya.

“As to life in a prison, of course there may be two opinions,” said the
prince. “I once heard the story of a man who lived twelve years in a
prison—I heard it from the man himself. He was one of the persons under
treatment with my professor; he had fits, and attacks of melancholy,
then he would weep, and once he tried to commit suicide. _His_ life in
prison was sad enough; his only acquaintances were spiders and a tree
that grew outside his grating—but I think I had better tell you of
another man I met last year. There was a very strange feature in this
case, strange because of its extremely rare occurrence. This man had
once been brought to the scaffold in company with several others, and
had had the sentence of death by shooting passed upon him for some
political crime. Twenty minutes later he had been reprieved and some
other punishment substituted; but the interval between the two
sentences, twenty minutes, or at least a quarter of an hour, had been
passed in the certainty that within a few minutes he must die. I was
very anxious to hear him speak of his impressions during that dreadful
time, and I several times inquired of him as to what he thought and
felt. He remembered everything with the most accurate and extraordinary
distinctness, and declared that he would never forget a single iota of
the experience.

“About twenty paces from the scaffold, where he had stood to hear the
sentence, were three posts, fixed in the ground, to which to fasten the
criminals (of whom there were several). The first three criminals were
taken to the posts, dressed in long white tunics, with white caps drawn
over their faces, so that they could not see the rifles pointed at
them. Then a group of soldiers took their stand opposite to each post.
My friend was the eighth on the list, and therefore he would have been
among the third lot to go up. A priest went about among them with a
cross: and there was about five minutes of time left for him to live.

“He said that those five minutes seemed to him to be a most
interminable period, an enormous wealth of time; he seemed to be
living, in these minutes, so many lives that there was no need as yet
to think of that last moment, so that he made several arrangements,
dividing up the time into portions—one for saying farewell to his
companions, two minutes for that; then a couple more for thinking over
his own life and career and all about himself; and another minute for a
last look around. He remembered having divided his time like this quite
well. While saying good-bye to his friends he recollected asking one of
them some very usual everyday question, and being much interested in
the answer. Then having bade farewell, he embarked upon those two
minutes which he had allotted to looking into himself; he knew
beforehand what he was going to think about. He wished to put it to
himself as quickly and clearly as possible, that here was he, a living,
thinking man, and that in three minutes he would be nobody; or if
somebody or something, then what and where? He thought he would decide
this question once for all in these last three minutes. A little way
off there stood a church, and its gilded spire glittered in the sun. He
remembered staring stubbornly at this spire, and at the rays of light
sparkling from it. He could not tear his eyes from these rays of light;
he got the idea that these rays were his new nature, and that in three
minutes he would become one of them, amalgamated somehow with them.

“The repugnance to what must ensue almost immediately, and the
uncertainty, were dreadful, he said; but worst of all was the idea,
‘What should I do if I were not to die now? What if I were to return to
life again? What an eternity of days, and all mine! How I should grudge
and count up every minute of it, so as to waste not a single instant!’
He said that this thought weighed so upon him and became such a
terrible burden upon his brain that he could not bear it, and wished
they would shoot him quickly and have done with it.”

The prince paused and all waited, expecting him to go on again and
finish the story.

“Is that all?” asked Aglaya.

“All? Yes,” said the prince, emerging from a momentary reverie.

“And why did you tell us this?”

“Oh, I happened to recall it, that’s all! It fitted into the
conversation—”

“You probably wish to deduce, prince,” said Alexandra, “that moments of
time cannot be reckoned by money value, and that sometimes five minutes
are worth priceless treasures. All this is very praiseworthy; but may I
ask about this friend of yours, who told you the terrible experience of
his life? He was reprieved, you say; in other words, they did restore
to him that ‘eternity of days.’ What did he do with these riches of
time? Did he keep careful account of his minutes?”

“Oh no, he didn’t! I asked him myself. He said that he had not lived a
bit as he had intended, and had wasted many, and many a minute.”

“Very well, then there’s an experiment, and the thing is proved; one
cannot live and count each moment; say what you like, but one
_cannot_.”

“That is true,” said the prince, “I have thought so myself. And yet,
why shouldn’t one do it?”

“You think, then, that you could live more wisely than other people?”
said Aglaya.

“I have had that idea.”

“And you have it still?”

“Yes—I have it still,” the prince replied.

He had contemplated Aglaya until now, with a pleasant though rather
timid smile, but as the last words fell from his lips he began to
laugh, and looked at her merrily.

“You are not very modest!” said she.

“But how brave you are!” said he. “You are laughing, and I—that man’s
tale impressed me so much, that I dreamt of it afterwards; yes, I
dreamt of those five minutes...”

He looked at his listeners again with that same serious, searching
expression.

“You are not angry with me?” he asked suddenly, and with a kind of
nervous hurry, although he looked them straight in the face.

“Why should we be angry?” they cried.

“Only because I seem to be giving you a lecture, all the time!”

At this they laughed heartily.

“Please don’t be angry with me,” continued the prince. “I know very
well that I have seen less of life than other people, and have less
knowledge of it. I must appear to speak strangely sometimes...”

He said the last words nervously.

“You say you have been happy, and that proves you have lived, not less,
but more than other people. Why make all these excuses?” interrupted
Aglaya in a mocking tone of voice. “Besides, you need not mind about
lecturing us; you have nothing to boast of. With your quietism, one
could live happily for a hundred years at least. One might show you the
execution of a felon, or show you one’s little finger. You could draw a
moral from either, and be quite satisfied. That sort of existence is
easy enough.”

“I can’t understand why you always fly into a temper,” said Mrs.
Epanchin, who had been listening to the conversation and examining the
faces of the speakers in turn. “I do not understand what you mean. What
has your little finger to do with it? The prince talks well, though he
is not amusing. He began all right, but now he seems sad.”

“Never mind, mamma! Prince, I wish you had seen an execution,” said
Aglaya. “I should like to ask you a question about that, if you had.”

“I have seen an execution,” said the prince.

“You have!” cried Aglaya. “I might have guessed it. That’s a fitting
crown to the rest of the story. If you have seen an execution, how can
you say you lived happily all the while?”

“But is there capital punishment where you were?” asked Adelaida.

“I saw it at Lyons. Schneider took us there, and as soon as we arrived
we came in for that.”

“Well, and did you like it very much? Was it very edifying and
instructive?” asked Aglaya.

“No, I didn’t like it at all, and was ill after seeing it; but I
confess I stared as though my eyes were fixed to the sight. I could not
tear them away.”

“I, too, should have been unable to tear my eyes away,” said Aglaya.

“They do not at all approve of women going to see an execution there.
The women who do go are condemned for it afterwards in the newspapers.”

“That is, by contending that it is not a sight for women they admit
that it is a sight for men. I congratulate them on the deduction. I
suppose you quite agree with them, prince?”

“Tell us about the execution,” put in Adelaida.

“I would much rather not, just now,” said the prince, a little
disturbed and frowning slightly.

“You don’t seem to want to tell us,” said Aglaya, with a mocking air.

“No,—the thing is, I was telling all about the execution a little while
ago, and—”

“Whom did you tell about it?”

“The man-servant, while I was waiting to see the general.”

“Our man-servant?” exclaimed several voices at once.

“Yes, the one who waits in the entrance hall, a greyish, red-faced
man—”

“The prince is clearly a democrat,” remarked Aglaya.

“Well, if you could tell Aleksey about it, surely you can tell us too.”

“I do so want to hear about it,” repeated Adelaida.

“Just now, I confess,” began the prince, with more animation, “when you
asked me for a subject for a picture, I confess I had serious thoughts
of giving you one. I thought of asking you to draw the face of a
criminal, one minute before the fall of the guillotine, while the
wretched man is still standing on the scaffold, preparatory to placing
his neck on the block.”

“What, his face? only his face?” asked Adelaida. “That would be a
strange subject indeed. And what sort of a picture would that make?”

“Oh, why not?” the prince insisted, with some warmth. “When I was in
Basle I saw a picture very much in that style—I should like to tell you
about it; I will some time or other; it struck me very forcibly.”

“Oh, you shall tell us about the Basle picture another time; now we
must have all about the execution,” said Adelaida. “Tell us about that
face as it appeared to your imagination—how should it be drawn?—just
the face alone, do you mean?”

“It was just a minute before the execution,” began the prince, readily,
carried away by the recollection and evidently forgetting everything
else in a moment; “just at the instant when he stepped off the ladder
on to the scaffold. He happened to look in my direction: I saw his eyes
and understood all, at once—but how am I to describe it? I do so wish
you or somebody else could draw it, you, if possible. I thought at the
time what a picture it would make. You must imagine all that went
before, of course, all—all. He had lived in the prison for some time
and had not expected that the execution would take place for at least a
week yet—he had counted on all the formalities and so on taking time;
but it so happened that his papers had been got ready quickly. At five
o’clock in the morning he was asleep—it was October, and at five in the
morning it was cold and dark. The governor of the prison comes in on
tip-toe and touches the sleeping man’s shoulder gently. He starts up.
‘What is it?’ he says. ‘The execution is fixed for ten o’clock.’ He was
only just awake, and would not believe at first, but began to argue
that his papers would not be out for a week, and so on. When he was
wide awake and realized the truth, he became very silent and argued no
more—so they say; but after a bit he said: ‘It comes very hard on one
so suddenly’ and then he was silent again and said nothing.

“The three or four hours went by, of course, in necessary
preparations—the priest, breakfast, (coffee, meat, and some wine they
gave him; doesn’t it seem ridiculous?) And yet I believe these people
give them a good breakfast out of pure kindness of heart, and believe
that they are doing a good action. Then he is dressed, and then begins
the procession through the town to the scaffold. I think he, too, must
feel that he has an age to live still while they cart him along.
Probably he thought, on the way, ‘Oh, I have a long, long time yet.
Three streets of life yet! When we’ve passed this street there’ll be
that other one; and then that one where the baker’s shop is on the
right; and when shall we get there? It’s ages, ages!’ Around him are
crowds shouting, yelling—ten thousand faces, twenty thousand eyes. All
this has to be endured, and especially the thought: ‘Here are ten
thousand men, and not one of them is going to be executed, and yet I am
to die.’ Well, all that is preparatory.

“At the scaffold there is a ladder, and just there he burst into
tears—and this was a strong man, and a terribly wicked one, they say!
There was a priest with him the whole time, talking; even in the cart
as they drove along, he talked and talked. Probably the other heard
nothing; he would begin to listen now and then, and at the third word
or so he had forgotten all about it.

“At last he began to mount the steps; his legs were tied, so that he
had to take very small steps. The priest, who seemed to be a wise man,
had stopped talking now, and only held the cross for the wretched
fellow to kiss. At the foot of the ladder he had been pale enough; but
when he set foot on the scaffold at the top, his face suddenly became
the colour of paper, positively like white notepaper. His legs must
have become suddenly feeble and helpless, and he felt a choking in his
throat—you know the sudden feeling one has in moments of terrible fear,
when one does not lose one’s wits, but is absolutely powerless to move?
If some dreadful thing were suddenly to happen; if a house were just
about to fall on one;—don’t you know how one would long to sit down and
shut one’s eyes and wait, and wait? Well, when this terrible feeling
came over him, the priest quickly pressed the cross to his lips,
without a word—a little silver cross it was—and he kept on pressing it
to the man’s lips every second. And whenever the cross touched his
lips, the eyes would open for a moment, and the legs moved once, and he
kissed the cross greedily, hurriedly—just as though he were anxious to
catch hold of something in case of its being useful to him afterwards,
though he could hardly have had any connected religious thoughts at the
time. And so up to the very block.

“How strange that criminals seldom swoon at such a moment! On the
contrary, the brain is especially active, and works
incessantly—probably hard, hard, hard—like an engine at full pressure.
I imagine that various thoughts must beat loud and fast through his
head—all unfinished ones, and strange, funny thoughts, very
likely!—like this, for instance: ‘That man is looking at me, and he has
a wart on his forehead! and the executioner has burst one of his
buttons, and the lowest one is all rusty!’ And meanwhile he notices and
remembers everything. There is one point that cannot be forgotten,
round which everything else dances and turns about; and because of this
point he cannot faint, and this lasts until the very final quarter of a
second, when the wretched neck is on the block and the victim listens
and waits and _knows_—that’s the point, he _knows_ that he is just
_now_ about to die, and listens for the rasp of the iron over his head.
If I lay there, I should certainly listen for that grating sound, and
hear it, too! There would probably be but the tenth part of an instant
left to hear it in, but one would certainly hear it. And imagine, some
people declare that when the head flies off it is _conscious_ of having
flown off! Just imagine what a thing to realize! Fancy if consciousness
were to last for even five seconds!

“Draw the scaffold so that only the top step of the ladder comes in
clearly. The criminal must be just stepping on to it, his face as white
as note-paper. The priest is holding the cross to his blue lips, and
the criminal kisses it, and knows and sees and understands everything.
The cross and the head—there’s your picture; the priest and the
executioner, with his two assistants, and a few heads and eyes below.
Those might come in as subordinate accessories—a sort of mist. There’s
a picture for you.” The prince paused, and looked around.

“Certainly that isn’t much like quietism,” murmured Alexandra, half to
herself.

“Now tell us about your love affairs,” said Adelaida, after a moment’s
pause.

The prince gazed at her in amazement.

“You know,” Adelaida continued, “you owe us a description of the Basle
picture; but first I wish to hear how you fell in love. Don’t deny the
fact, for you did, of course. Besides, you stop philosophizing when you
are telling about anything.”

“Why are you ashamed of your stories the moment after you have told
them?” asked Aglaya, suddenly.

“How silly you are!” said Mrs. Epanchin, looking indignantly towards
the last speaker.

“Yes, that wasn’t a clever remark,” said Alexandra.

“Don’t listen to her, prince,” said Mrs. Epanchin; “she says that sort
of thing out of mischief. Don’t think anything of their nonsense, it
means nothing. They love to chaff, but they like you. I can see it in
their faces—I know their faces.”

“I know their faces, too,” said the prince, with a peculiar stress on
the words.

“How so?” asked Adelaida, with curiosity.

“What do _you_ know about our faces?” exclaimed the other two, in
chorus.

But the prince was silent and serious. All awaited his reply.

“I’ll tell you afterwards,” he said quietly.

“Ah, you want to arouse our curiosity!” said Aglaya. “And how terribly
solemn you are about it!”

“Very well,” interrupted Adelaida, “then if you can read faces so well,
you _must_ have been in love. Come now; I’ve guessed—let’s have the
secret!”

“I have not been in love,” said the prince, as quietly and seriously as
before. “I have been happy in another way.”

“How, how?”

“Well, I’ll tell you,” said the prince, apparently in a deep reverie.

VI.

“Here you all are,” began the prince, “settling yourselves down to
listen to me with so much curiosity, that if I do not satisfy you you
will probably be angry with me. No, no! I’m only joking!” he added,
hastily, with a smile.

“Well, then—they were all children there, and I was always among
children and only with children. They were the children of the village
in which I lived, and they went to the school there—all of them. I did
not teach them, oh no; there was a master for that, one Jules Thibaut.
I may have taught them some things, but I was among them just as an
outsider, and I passed all four years of my life there among them. I
wished for nothing better; I used to tell them everything and hid
nothing from them. Their fathers and relations were very angry with me,
because the children could do nothing without me at last, and used to
throng after me at all times. The schoolmaster was my greatest enemy in
the end! I had many enemies, and all because of the children. Even
Schneider reproached me. What were they afraid of? One can tell a child
everything, anything. I have often been struck by the fact that parents
know their children so little. They should not conceal so much from
them. How well even little children understand that their parents
conceal things from them, because they consider them too young to
understand! Children are capable of giving advice in the most important
matters. How can one deceive these dear little birds, when they look at
one so sweetly and confidingly? I call them birds because there is
nothing in the world better than birds!

“However, most of the people were angry with me about one and the same
thing; but Thibaut simply was jealous of me. At first he had wagged his
head and wondered how it was that the children understood what I told
them so well, and could not learn from him; and he laughed like
anything when I replied that neither he nor I could teach them very
much, but that _they_ might teach us a good deal.

“How he could hate me and tell scandalous stories about me, living
among children as he did, is what I cannot understand. Children soothe
and heal the wounded heart. I remember there was one poor fellow at our
professor’s who was being treated for madness, and you have no idea
what those children did for him, eventually. I don’t think he was mad,
but only terribly unhappy. But I’ll tell you all about him another day.
Now I must get on with this story.

“The children did not love me at first; I was such a sickly, awkward
kind of a fellow then—and I know I am ugly. Besides, I was a foreigner.
The children used to laugh at me, at first; and they even went so far
as to throw stones at me, when they saw me kiss Marie. I only kissed
her once in my life—no, no, don’t laugh!” The prince hastened to
suppress the smiles of his audience at this point. “It was not a matter
of _love_ at all! If only you knew what a miserable creature she was,
you would have pitied her, just as I did. She belonged to our village.
Her mother was an old, old woman, and they used to sell string and
thread, and soap and tobacco, out of the window of their little house,
and lived on the pittance they gained by this trade. The old woman was
ill and very old, and could hardly move. Marie was her daughter, a girl
of twenty, weak and thin and consumptive; but still she did heavy work
at the houses around, day by day. Well, one fine day a commercial
traveller betrayed her and carried her off; and a week later he
deserted her. She came home dirty, draggled, and shoeless; she had
walked for a whole week without shoes; she had slept in the fields, and
caught a terrible cold; her feet were swollen and sore, and her hands
torn and scratched all over. She never had been pretty even before; but
her eyes were quiet, innocent, kind eyes.

“She was very quiet always—and I remember once, when she had suddenly
begun singing at her work, everyone said, ‘Marie tried to sing today!’
and she got so chaffed that she was silent for ever after. She had been
treated kindly in the place before; but when she came back now—ill and
shunned and miserable—not one of them all had the slightest sympathy
for her. Cruel people! Oh, what hazy understandings they have on such
matters! Her mother was the first to show the way. She received her
wrathfully, unkindly, and with contempt. ‘You have disgraced me,’ she
said. She was the first to cast her into ignominy; but when they all
heard that Marie had returned to the village, they ran out to see her
and crowded into the little cottage—old men, children, women,
girls—such a hurrying, stamping, greedy crowd. Marie was lying on the
floor at the old woman’s feet, hungry, torn, draggled, crying,
miserable.

“When everyone crowded into the room she hid her face in her
dishevelled hair and lay cowering on the floor. Everyone looked at her
as though she were a piece of dirt off the road. The old men scolded
and condemned, and the young ones laughed at her. The women condemned
her too, and looked at her contemptuously, just as though she were some
loathsome insect.

“Her mother allowed all this to go on, and nodded her head and
encouraged them. The old woman was very ill at that time, and knew she
was dying (she really did die a couple of months later), and though she
felt the end approaching she never thought of forgiving her daughter,
to the very day of her death. She would not even speak to her. She made
her sleep on straw in a shed, and hardly gave her food enough to
support life.

“Marie was very gentle to her mother, and nursed her, and did
everything for her; but the old woman accepted all her services without
a word and never showed her the slightest kindness. Marie bore all
this; and I could see when I got to know her that she thought it quite
right and fitting, considering herself the lowest and meanest of
creatures.

“When the old woman took to her bed finally, the other old women in the
village sat with her by turns, as the custom is there; and then Marie
was quite driven out of the house. They gave her no food at all, and
she could not get any work in the village; none would employ her. The
men seemed to consider her no longer a woman, they said such dreadful
things to her. Sometimes on Sundays, if they were drunk enough, they
used to throw her a penny or two, into the mud, and Marie would
silently pick up the money. She had began to spit blood at that time.

“At last her rags became so tattered and torn that she was ashamed of
appearing in the village any longer. The children used to pelt her with
mud; so she begged to be taken on as assistant cowherd, but the cowherd
would not have her. Then she took to helping him without leave; and he
saw how valuable her assistance was to him, and did not drive her away
again; on the contrary, he occasionally gave her the remnants of his
dinner, bread and cheese. He considered that he was being very kind.
When the mother died, the village parson was not ashamed to hold Marie
up to public derision and shame. Marie was standing at the coffin’s
head, in all her rags, crying.

“A crowd of people had collected to see how she would cry. The parson,
a young fellow ambitious of becoming a great preacher, began his sermon
and pointed to Marie. ‘There,’ he said, ‘there is the cause of the
death of this venerable woman’—(which was a lie, because she had been
ill for at least two years)—‘there she stands before you, and dares not
lift her eyes from the ground, because she knows that the finger of God
is upon her. Look at her tatters and rags—the badge of those who lose
their virtue. Who is she? her daughter!’ and so on to the end.

“And just fancy, this infamy pleased them, all of them, nearly. Only
the children had altered—for then they were all on my side and had
learned to love Marie.

“This is how it was: I had wished to do something for Marie; I longed
to give her some money, but I never had a farthing while I was there.
But I had a little diamond pin, and this I sold to a travelling pedlar;
he gave me eight francs for it—it was worth at least forty.

“I long sought to meet Marie alone; and at last I did meet her, on the
hillside beyond the village. I gave her the eight francs and asked her
to take care of the money because I could get no more; and then I
kissed her and said that she was not to suppose I kissed her with any
evil motives or because I was in love with her, for that I did so
solely out of pity for her, and because from the first I had not
accounted her as guilty so much as unfortunate. I longed to console and
encourage her somehow, and to assure her that she was not the low, base
thing which she and others strove to make out; but I don’t think she
understood me. She stood before me, dreadfully ashamed of herself, and
with downcast eyes; and when I had finished she kissed my hand. I would
have kissed hers, but she drew it away. Just at this moment the whole
troop of children saw us. (I found out afterwards that they had long
kept a watch upon me.) They all began whistling and clapping their
hands, and laughing at us. Marie ran away at once; and when I tried to
talk to them, they threw stones at me. All the village heard of it the
same day, and Marie’s position became worse than ever. The children
would not let her pass now in the streets, but annoyed her and threw
dirt at her more than before. They used to run after her—she racing
away with her poor feeble lungs panting and gasping, and they pelting
her and shouting abuse at her.

“Once I had to interfere by force; and after that I took to speaking to
them every day and whenever I could. Occasionally they stopped and
listened; but they teased Marie all the same.

“I told them how unhappy Marie was, and after a while they stopped
their abuse of her, and let her go by silently. Little by little we got
into the way of conversing together, the children and I. I concealed
nothing from them, I told them all. They listened very attentively and
soon began to be sorry for Marie. At last some of them took to saying
‘Good-morning’ to her, kindly, when they met her. It is the custom
there to salute anyone you meet with ‘Good-morning’ whether acquainted
or not. I can imagine how astonished Marie was at these first greetings
from the children.

“Once two little girls got hold of some food and took it to her, and
came back and told me. They said she had burst into tears, and that
they loved her very much now. Very soon after that they all became fond
of Marie, and at the same time they began to develop the greatest
affection for myself. They often came to me and begged me to tell them
stories. I think I must have told stories well, for they did so love to
hear them. At last I took to reading up interesting things on purpose
to pass them on to the little ones, and this went on for all the rest
of my time there, three years. Later, when everyone—even Schneider—was
angry with me for hiding nothing from the children, I pointed out how
foolish it was, for they always knew things, only they learnt them in a
way that soiled their minds but not so from me. One has only to
remember one’s own childhood to admit the truth of this. But nobody was
convinced... It was two weeks before her mother died that I had kissed
Marie; and when the clergyman preached that sermon the children were
all on my side.

“When I told them what a shame it was of the parson to talk as he had
done, and explained my reason, they were so angry that some of them
went and broke his windows with stones. Of course I stopped them, for
that was not right, but all the village heard of it, and how I caught
it for spoiling the children! Everyone discovered now that the little
ones had taken to being fond of Marie, and their parents were terribly
alarmed; but Marie was so happy. The children were forbidden to meet
her; but they used to run out of the village to the herd and take her
food and things; and sometimes just ran off there and kissed her, and
said, ‘_Je vous aime, Marie!_’ and then trotted back again. They
imagined that I was in love with Marie, and this was the only point on
which I did not undeceive them, for they got such enjoyment out of it.
And what delicacy and tenderness they showed!

“In the evening I used to walk to the waterfall. There was a spot there
which was quite closed in and hidden from view by large trees; and to
this spot the children used to come to me. They could not bear that
their dear Leon should love a poor girl without shoes to her feet and
dressed all in rags and tatters. So, would you believe it, they
actually clubbed together, somehow, and bought her shoes and stockings,
and some linen, and even a dress! I can’t understand how they managed
it, but they did it, all together. When I asked them about it they only
laughed and shouted, and the little girls clapped their hands and
kissed me. I sometimes went to see Marie secretly, too. She had become
very ill, and could hardly walk. She still went with the herd, but
could not help the herdsman any longer. She used to sit on a stone
near, and wait there almost motionless all day, till the herd went
home. Her consumption was so advanced, and she was so weak, that she
used to sit with closed eyes, breathing heavily. Her face was as thin
as a skeleton’s, and sweat used to stand on her white brow in large
drops. I always found her sitting just like that. I used to come up
quietly to look at her; but Marie would hear me, open her eyes, and
tremble violently as she kissed my hands. I did not take my hand away
because it made her happy to have it, and so she would sit and cry
quietly. Sometimes she tried to speak; but it was very difficult to
understand her. She was almost like a madwoman, with excitement and
ecstasy, whenever I came. Occasionally the children came with me; when
they did so, they would stand some way off and keep guard over us, so
as to tell me if anybody came near. This was a great pleasure to them.

“When we left her, Marie used to relapse at once into her old
condition, and sit with closed eyes and motionless limbs. One day she
could not go out at all, and remained at home all alone in the empty
hut; but the children very soon became aware of the fact, and nearly
all of them visited her that day as she lay alone and helpless in her
miserable bed.

“For two days the children looked after her, and then, when the village
people got to know that Marie was really dying, some of the old women
came and took it in turns to sit by her and look after her a bit. I
think they began to be a little sorry for her in the village at last;
at all events they did not interfere with the children any more, on her
account.

“Marie lay in a state of uncomfortable delirium the whole while; she
coughed dreadfully. The old women would not let the children stay in
the room; but they all collected outside the window each morning, if
only for a moment, and shouted ‘_Bon jour, notre bonne Marie!_’ and
Marie no sooner caught sight of, or heard them, and she became quite
animated at once, and, in spite of the old women, would try to sit up
and nod her head and smile at them, and thank them. The little ones
used to bring her nice things and sweets to eat, but she could hardly
touch anything. Thanks to them, I assure you, the girl died almost
perfectly happy. She almost forgot her misery, and seemed to accept
their love as a sort of symbol of pardon for her offence, though she
never ceased to consider herself a dreadful sinner. They used to
flutter at her window just like little birds, calling out: ‘_Nous
t’aimons, Marie!_’

“She died very soon; I had thought she would live much longer. The day
before her death I went to see her for the last time, just before
sunset. I think she recognized me, for she pressed my hand.

“Next morning they came and told me that Marie was dead. The children
could not be restrained now; they went and covered her coffin with
flowers, and put a wreath of lovely blossoms on her head. The pastor
did not throw any more shameful words at the poor dead woman; but there
were very few people at the funeral. However, when it came to carrying
the coffin, all the children rushed up, to carry it themselves. Of
course they could not do it alone, but they insisted on helping, and
walked alongside and behind, crying.

“They have planted roses all round her grave, and every year they look
after the flowers and make Marie’s resting-place as beautiful as they
can. I was in ill odour after all this with the parents of the
children, and especially with the parson and schoolmaster. Schneider
was obliged to promise that I should not meet them and talk to them;
but we conversed from a distance by signs, and they used to write me
sweet little notes. Afterwards I came closer than ever to those little
souls, but even then it was very dear to me, to have them so fond of
me.

“Schneider said that I did the children great harm by my pernicious
‘system’; what nonsense that was! And what did he mean by my system? He
said afterwards that he believed I was a child myself—just before I
came away. ‘You have the form and face of an adult’ he said, ‘but as
regards soul, and character, and perhaps even intelligence, you are a
child in the completest sense of the word, and always will be, if you
live to be sixty.’ I laughed very much, for of course that is nonsense.
But it is a fact that I do not care to be among grown-up people and
much prefer the society of children. However kind people may be to me,
I never feel quite at home with them, and am always glad to get back to
my little companions. Now my companions have always been children, not
because I was a child myself once, but because young things attract me.
On one of the first days of my stay in Switzerland, I was strolling
about alone and miserable, when I came upon the children rushing
noisily out of school, with their slates and bags, and books, their
games, their laughter and shouts—and my soul went out to them. I
stopped and laughed happily as I watched their little feet moving so
quickly. Girls and boys, laughing and crying; for as they went home
many of them found time to fight and make peace, to weep and play. I
forgot my troubles in looking at them. And then, all those three years,
I tried to understand why men should be for ever tormenting themselves.
I lived the life of a child there, and thought I should never leave the
little village; indeed, I was far from thinking that I should ever
return to Russia. But at last I recognized the fact that Schneider
could not keep me any longer. And then something so important happened,
that Schneider himself urged me to depart. I am going to see now if can
get good advice about it. Perhaps my lot in life will be changed; but
that is not the principal thing. The principal thing is the entire
change that has already come over me. I left many things behind me—too
many. They have gone. On the journey I said to myself, ‘I am going into
the world of men. I don’t know much, perhaps, but a new life has begun
for me.’ I made up my mind to be honest, and steadfast in accomplishing
my task. Perhaps I shall meet with troubles and many disappointments,
but I have made up my mind to be polite and sincere to everyone; more
cannot be asked of me. People may consider me a child if they like. I
am often called an idiot, and at one time I certainly was so ill that I
was nearly as bad as an idiot; but I am not an idiot now. How can I
possibly be so when I know myself that I am considered one?

“When I received a letter from those dear little souls, while passing
through Berlin, I only then realized how much I loved them. It was
very, very painful, getting that first little letter. How melancholy
they had been when they saw me off! For a month before, they had been
talking of my departure and sorrowing over it; and at the waterfall, of
an evening, when we parted for the night, they would hug me so tight
and kiss me so warmly, far more so than before. And every now and then
they would turn up one by one when I was alone, just to give me a kiss
and a hug, to show their love for me. The whole flock went with me to
the station, which was about a mile from the village, and every now and
then one of them would stop to throw his arms round me, and all the
little girls had tears in their voices, though they tried hard not to
cry. As the train steamed out of the station, I saw them all standing
on the platform waving to me and crying ‘Hurrah!’ till they were lost
in the distance.

“I assure you, when I came in here just now and saw your kind faces (I
can read faces well) my heart felt light for the first time since that
moment of parting. I think I must be one of those who are born to be in
luck, for one does not often meet with people whom one feels he can
love from the first sight of their faces; and yet, no sooner do I step
out of the railway carriage than I happen upon you!

“I know it is more or less a shamefaced thing to speak of one’s
feelings before others; and yet here am I talking like this to you, and
am not a bit ashamed or shy. I am an unsociable sort of fellow and
shall very likely not come to see you again for some time; but don’t
think the worse of me for that. It is not that I do not value your
society; and you must never suppose that I have taken offence at
anything.

“You asked me about your faces, and what I could read in them; I will
tell you with the greatest pleasure. You, Adelaida Ivanovna, have a
very happy face; it is the most sympathetic of the three. Not to speak
of your natural beauty, one can look at your face and say to one’s
self, ‘She has the face of a kind sister.’ You are simple and merry,
but you can see into another’s heart very quickly. That’s what I read
in your face.

“You too, Alexandra Ivanovna, have a very lovely face; but I think you
may have some secret sorrow. Your heart is undoubtedly a kind, good
one, but you are not merry. There is a certain suspicion of ‘shadow’ in
your face, like in that of Holbein’s Madonna in Dresden. So much for
your face. Have I guessed right?

“As for your face, Lizabetha Prokofievna, I not only think, but am
perfectly _sure_, that you are an absolute child—in all, in all, mind,
both good and bad—and in spite of your years. Don’t be angry with me
for saying so; you know what my feelings for children are. And do not
suppose that I am so candid out of pure simplicity of soul. Oh dear no,
it is by no means the case! Perhaps I have my own very profound object
in view.”

VII.

When the prince ceased speaking all were gazing merrily at him—even
Aglaya; but Lizabetha Prokofievna looked the jolliest of all.

“Well!” she cried, “we _have_ ‘put him through his paces,’ with a
vengeance! My dears, you imagined, I believe, that you were about to
patronize this young gentleman, like some poor _protégé_ picked up
somewhere, and taken under your magnificent protection. What fools we
were, and what a specially big fool is your father! Well done, prince!
I assure you the general actually asked me to put you through your
paces, and examine you. As to what you said about my face, you are
absolutely correct in your judgment. I am a child, and know it. I knew
it long before you said so; you have expressed my own thoughts. I think
your nature and mine must be extremely alike, and I am very glad of it.
We are like two drops of water, only you are a man and I a woman, and
I’ve not been to Switzerland, and that is all the difference between
us.”

“Don’t be in a hurry, mother; the prince says that he has some motive
behind his simplicity,” cried Aglaya.

“Yes, yes, so he does,” laughed the others.

“Oh, don’t you begin bantering him,” said mamma. “He is probably a good
deal cleverer than all three of you girls put together. We shall see.
Only you haven’t told us anything about Aglaya yet, prince; and Aglaya
and I are both waiting to hear.”

“I cannot say anything at present. I’ll tell you afterwards.”

“Why? Her face is clear enough, isn’t it?”

“Oh yes, of course. You are very beautiful, Aglaya Ivanovna, so
beautiful that one is afraid to look at you.”

“Is that all? What about her character?” persisted Mrs. Epanchin.

“It is difficult to judge when such beauty is concerned. I have not
prepared my judgment. Beauty is a riddle.”

“That means that you have set Aglaya a riddle!” said Adelaida. “Guess
it, Aglaya! But she’s pretty, prince, isn’t she?”

“Most wonderfully so,” said the latter, warmly, gazing at Aglaya with
admiration. “Almost as lovely as Nastasia Philipovna, but quite a
different type.”

All present exchanged looks of surprise.

“As lovely as _who?_” said Mrs. Epanchin. “As _Nastasia Philipovna?_
Where have you seen Nastasia Philipovna? What Nastasia Philipovna?”

“Gavrila Ardalionovitch showed the general her portrait just now.”

“How so? Did he bring the portrait for my husband?”

“Only to show it. Nastasia Philipovna gave it to Gavrila Ardalionovitch
today, and the latter brought it here to show to the general.”

“I must see it!” cried Mrs. Epanchin. “Where is the portrait? If she
gave it to him, he must have it; and he is still in the study. He never
leaves before four o’clock on Wednesdays. Send for Gavrila
Ardalionovitch at once. No, I don’t long to see _him_ so much. Look
here, dear prince, _be_ so kind, will you? Just step to the study and
fetch this portrait! Say we want to look at it. Please do this for me,
will you?”

“He is a nice fellow, but a little too simple,” said Adelaida, as the
prince left the room.

“He is, indeed,” said Alexandra; “almost laughably so at times.”

Neither one nor the other seemed to give expression to her full
thoughts.

“He got out of it very neatly about our faces, though,” said Aglaya.
“He flattered us all round, even mamma.”

“Nonsense!” cried the latter. “He did not flatter me. It was I who
found his appreciation flattering. I think you are a great deal more
foolish than he is. He is simple, of course, but also very knowing.
Just like myself.”

“How stupid of me to speak of the portrait,” thought the prince as he
entered the study, with a feeling of guilt at his heart, “and yet,
perhaps I was right after all.” He had an idea, unformed as yet, but a
strange idea.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch was still sitting in the study, buried in a mass
of papers. He looked as though he did not take his salary from the
public company, whose servant he was, for a sinecure.

He grew very wroth and confused when the prince asked for the portrait,
and explained how it came about that he had spoken of it.

“Oh, curse it all,” he said; “what on earth must you go blabbing for?
You know nothing about the thing, and yet—idiot!” he added, muttering
the last word to himself in irrepressible rage.

“I am very sorry; I was not thinking at the time. I merely said that
Aglaya was almost as beautiful as Nastasia Philipovna.”

Gania asked for further details; and the prince once more repeated the
conversation. Gania looked at him with ironical contempt the while.

“Nastasia Philipovna,” he began, and there paused; he was clearly much
agitated and annoyed. The prince reminded him of the portrait.

“Listen, prince,” said Gania, as though an idea had just struck him, “I
wish to ask you a great favour, and yet I really don’t know—”

He paused again, he was trying to make up his mind to something, and
was turning the matter over. The prince waited quietly. Once more Gania
fixed him with intent and questioning eyes.

“Prince,” he began again, “they are rather angry with me, in there,
owing to a circumstance which I need not explain, so that I do not care
to go in at present without an invitation. I particularly wish to speak
to Aglaya, but I have written a few words in case I shall not have the
chance of seeing her” (here the prince observed a small note in his
hand), “and I do not know how to get my communication to her. Don’t you
think you could undertake to give it to her at once, but only to her,
mind, and so that no one else should see you give it? It isn’t much of
a secret, but still—Well, will you do it?”

“I don’t quite like it,” replied the prince.

“Oh, but it is absolutely necessary for me,” Gania entreated. “Believe
me, if it were not so, I would not ask you; how else am I to get it to
her? It is most important, dreadfully important!”

Gania was evidently much alarmed at the idea that the prince would not
consent to take his note, and he looked at him now with an expression
of absolute entreaty.

“Well, I will take it then.”

“But mind, nobody is to see!” cried the delighted Gania “And of course
I may rely on your word of honour, eh?”

“I won’t show it to anyone,” said the prince.

“The letter is not sealed—” continued Gania, and paused in confusion.

“Oh, I won’t read it,” said the prince, quite simply.

He took up the portrait, and went out of the room.

Gania, left alone, clutched his head with his hands.

“One word from her,” he said, “one word from her, and I may yet be
free.”

He could not settle himself to his papers again, for agitation and
excitement, but began walking up and down the room from corner to
corner.

The prince walked along, musing. He did not like his commission, and
disliked the idea of Gania sending a note to Aglaya at all; but when he
was two rooms distant from the drawing-room, where they all were, he
stopped as though recalling something; went to the window, nearer the
light, and began to examine the portrait in his hand.

He longed to solve the mystery of something in the face of Nastasia
Philipovna, something which had struck him as he looked at the portrait
for the first time; the impression had not left him. It was partly the
fact of her marvellous beauty that struck him, and partly something
else. There was a suggestion of immense pride and disdain in the face
almost of hatred, and at the same time something confiding and very
full of simplicity. The contrast aroused a deep sympathy in his heart
as he looked at the lovely face. The blinding loveliness of it was
almost intolerable, this pale thin face with its flaming eyes; it was a
strange beauty.

The prince gazed at it for a minute or two, then glanced around him,
and hurriedly raised the portrait to his lips. When, a minute after, he
reached the drawing-room door, his face was quite composed. But just as
he reached the door he met Aglaya coming out alone.

“Gavrila Ardalionovitch begged me to give you this,” he said, handing
her the note.

Aglaya stopped, took the letter, and gazed strangely into the prince’s
eyes. There was no confusion in her face; a little surprise, perhaps,
but that was all. By her look she seemed merely to challenge the prince
to an explanation as to how he and Gania happened to be connected in
this matter. But her expression was perfectly cool and quiet, and even
condescending.

So they stood for a moment or two, confronting one another. At length a
faint smile passed over her face, and she passed by him without a word.

Mrs. Epanchin examined the portrait of Nastasia Philipovna for some
little while, holding it critically at arm’s length.

“Yes, she is pretty,” she said at last, “even very pretty. I have seen
her twice, but only at a distance. So you admire this kind of beauty,
do you?” she asked the prince, suddenly.

“Yes, I do—this kind.”

“Do you mean especially this kind?”

“Yes, especially this kind.”

“Why?”

“There is much suffering in this face,” murmured the prince, more as
though talking to himself than answering the question.

“I think you are wandering a little, prince,” Mrs. Epanchin decided,
after a lengthened survey of his face; and she tossed the portrait on
to the table, haughtily.

Alexandra took it, and Adelaida came up, and both the girls examined
the photograph. Just then Aglaya entered the room.

“What a power!” cried Adelaida suddenly, as she earnestly examined the
portrait over her sister’s shoulder.

“Whom? What power?” asked her mother, crossly.

“Such beauty is real power,” said Adelaida. “With such beauty as that
one might overthrow the world.” She returned to her easel thoughtfully.

Aglaya merely glanced at the portrait—frowned, and put out her
underlip; then went and sat down on the sofa with folded hands. Mrs.
Epanchin rang the bell.

“Ask Gavrila Ardalionovitch to step this way,” said she to the man who
answered.

“Mamma!” cried Alexandra, significantly.

“I shall just say two words to him, that’s all,” said her mother,
silencing all objection by her manner; she was evidently seriously put
out. “You see, prince, it is all secrets with us, just now—all secrets.
It seems to be the etiquette of the house, for some reason or other.
Stupid nonsense, and in a matter which ought to be approached with all
candour and open-heartedness. There is a marriage being talked of, and
I don’t like this marriage—”

“Mamma, what are you saying?” said Alexandra again, hurriedly.

“Well, what, my dear girl? As if you can possibly like it yourself? The
heart is the great thing, and the rest is all rubbish—though one must
have sense as well. Perhaps sense is really the great thing. Don’t
smile like that, Aglaya. I don’t contradict myself. A fool with a heart
and no brains is just as unhappy as a fool with brains and no heart. I
am one and you are the other, and therefore both of us suffer, both of
us are unhappy.”

“Why are you so unhappy, mother?” asked Adelaida, who alone of all the
company seemed to have preserved her good temper and spirits up to now.

“In the first place, because of my carefully brought-up daughters,”
said Mrs. Epanchin, cuttingly; “and as that is the best reason I can
give you we need not bother about any other at present. Enough of
words, now! We shall see how both of you (I don’t count Aglaya) will
manage your business, and whether you, most revered Alexandra Ivanovna,
will be happy with your fine mate.”

“Ah!” she added, as Gania suddenly entered the room, “here’s another
marrying subject. How do you do?” she continued, in response to Gania’s
bow; but she did not invite him to sit down. “You are going to be
married?”

“Married? how—what marriage?” murmured Gania, overwhelmed with
confusion.

“Are you about to take a wife? I ask,—if you prefer that expression.”

“No, no I—I—no!” said Gania, bringing out his lie with a tell-tale
blush of shame. He glanced keenly at Aglaya, who was sitting some way
off, and dropped his eyes immediately.

Aglaya gazed coldly, intently, and composedly at him, without taking
her eyes off his face, and watched his confusion.

“No? You say no, do you?” continued the pitiless Mrs. General. “Very
well, I shall remember that you told me this Wednesday morning, in
answer to my question, that you are not going to be married. What day
is it, Wednesday, isn’t it?”

“Yes, I think so!” said Adelaida.

“You never know the day of the week; what’s the day of the month?”

“Twenty-seventh!” said Gania.

“Twenty-seventh; very well. Good-bye now; you have a good deal to do,
I’m sure, and I must dress and go out. Take your portrait. Give my
respects to your unfortunate mother, Nina Alexandrovna. _Au revoir_,
dear prince, come in and see us often, do; and I shall tell old
Princess Bielokonski about you. I shall go and see her on purpose. And
listen, my dear boy, I feel sure that God has sent you to Petersburg
from Switzerland on purpose for me. Maybe you will have other things to
do, besides, but you are sent chiefly for my sake, I feel sure of it.
God sent you to me! _Au revoir!_ Alexandra, come with me, my dear.”

Mrs. Epanchin left the room.

Gania—confused, annoyed, furious—took up his portrait, and turned to
the prince with a nasty smile on his face.

“Prince,” he said, “I am just going home. If you have not changed your
mind as to living with us, perhaps you would like to come with me. You
don’t know the address, I believe?”

“Wait a minute, prince,” said Aglaya, suddenly rising from her seat,
“do write something in my album first, will you? Father says you are a
most talented caligraphist; I’ll bring you my book in a minute.” She
left the room.

“Well, _au revoir_, prince,” said Adelaida, “I must be going too.” She
pressed the prince’s hand warmly, and gave him a friendly smile as she
left the room. She did not so much as look at Gania.

“This is your doing, prince,” said Gania, turning on the latter so soon
as the others were all out of the room. “This is your doing, sir! _You_
have been telling them that I am going to be married!” He said this in
a hurried whisper, his eyes flashing with rage and his face ablaze.
“You shameless tattler!”

“I assure you, you are under a delusion,” said the prince, calmly and
politely. “I did not even know that you were to be married.”

“You heard me talking about it, the general and me. You heard me say
that everything was to be settled today at Nastasia Philipovna’s, and
you went and blurted it out here. You lie if you deny it. Who else
could have told them? Devil take it, sir, who could have told them
except yourself? Didn’t the old woman as good as hint as much to me?”

“If she hinted to you who told her you must know best, of course; but I
never said a word about it.”

“Did you give my note? Is there an answer?” interrupted Gania,
impatiently.

But at this moment Aglaya came back, and the prince had no time to
reply.

“There, prince,” said she, “there’s my album. Now choose a page and
write me something, will you? There’s a pen, a new one; do you mind a
steel one? I have heard that you caligraphists don’t like steel pens.”

Conversing with the prince, Aglaya did not even seem to notice that
Gania was in the room. But while the prince was getting his pen ready,
finding a page, and making his preparations to write, Gania came up to
the fireplace where Aglaya was standing, to the right of the prince,
and in trembling, broken accents said, almost in her ear:

“One word, just one word from you, and I’m saved.”

The prince turned sharply round and looked at both of them. Gania’s
face was full of real despair; he seemed to have said the words almost
unconsciously and on the impulse of the moment.

Aglaya gazed at him for some seconds with precisely the same composure
and calm astonishment as she had shown a little while before, when the
prince handed her the note, and it appeared that this calm surprise and
seemingly absolute incomprehension of what was said to her, were more
terribly overwhelming to Gania than even the most plainly expressed
disdain would have been.

“What shall I write?” asked the prince.

“I’ll dictate to you,” said Aglaya, coming up to the table. “Now then,
are you ready? Write, ‘I never condescend to bargain!’ Now put your
name and the date. Let me see it.”

The prince handed her the album.

“Capital! How beautifully you have written it! Thanks so much. _Au
revoir_, prince. Wait a minute,” she added, “I want to give you
something for a keepsake. Come with me this way, will you?”

The prince followed her. Arrived at the dining-room, she stopped.

“Read this,” she said, handing him Gania’s note.

The prince took it from her hand, but gazed at her in bewilderment.

“Oh! I _know_ you haven’t read it, and that you could never be that
man’s accomplice. Read it, I wish you to read it.”

The letter had evidently been written in a hurry:

“My fate is to be decided today” (it ran), “you know how. This day I
must give my word irrevocably. I have no right to ask your help, and I
dare not allow myself to indulge in any hopes; but once you said just
one word, and that word lighted up the night of my life, and became the
beacon of my days. Say one more such word, and save me from utter ruin.
Only tell me, ‘break off the whole thing!’ and I will do so this very
day. Oh! what can it cost you to say just this one word? In doing so
you will but be giving me a sign of your sympathy for me, and of your
pity; only this, only this; nothing more, _nothing_. I dare not indulge
in any hope, because I am unworthy of it. But if you say but this word,
I will take up my cross again with joy, and return once more to my
battle with poverty. I shall meet the storm and be glad of it; I shall
rise up with renewed strength.
    “Send me back then this one word of sympathy, only sympathy, I
    swear to you; and oh! do not be angry with the audacity of despair,
    with the drowning man who has dared to make this last effort to
    save himself from perishing beneath the waters.


“G.L.”


“This man assures me,” said Aglaya, scornfully, when the prince had
finished reading the letter, “that the words ‘break off everything’ do
not commit me to anything whatever; and himself gives me a written
guarantee to that effect, in this letter. Observe how ingenuously he
underlines certain words, and how crudely he glosses over his hidden
thoughts. He must know that if he ‘broke off everything,’ _first_, by
himself, and without telling me a word about it or having the slightest
hope on my account, that in that case I should perhaps be able to
change my opinion of him, and even accept his—friendship. He must know
that, but his soul is such a wretched thing. He knows it and cannot
make up his mind; he knows it and yet asks for guarantees. He cannot
bring himself to _trust_, he wants me to give him hopes of myself
before he lets go of his hundred thousand roubles. As to the ‘former
word’ which he declares ‘lighted up the night of his life,’ he is
simply an impudent liar; I merely pitied him once. But he is audacious
and shameless. He immediately began to hope, at that very moment. I saw
it. He has tried to catch me ever since; he is still fishing for me.
Well, enough of this. Take the letter and give it back to him, as soon
as you have left our house; not before, of course.”

“And what shall I tell him by way of answer?”

“Nothing—of course! That’s the best answer. Is it the case that you are
going to live in his house?”

“Yes, your father kindly recommended me to him.”

“Then look out for him, I warn you! He won’t forgive you easily, for
taking back the letter.”

Aglaya pressed the prince’s hand and left the room. Her face was
serious and frowning; she did not even smile as she nodded good-bye to
him at the door.

“I’ll just get my parcel and we’ll go,” said the prince to Gania, as he
re-entered the drawing-room. Gania stamped his foot with impatience.
His face looked dark and gloomy with rage.

At last they left the house behind them, the prince carrying his
bundle.

“The answer—quick—the answer!” said Gania, the instant they were
outside. “What did she say? Did you give the letter?” The prince
silently held out the note. Gania was struck motionless with amazement.

“How, what? my letter?” he cried. “He never delivered it! I might have
guessed it, oh! curse him! Of course she did not understand what I
meant, naturally! Why—why—_why_ didn’t you give her the note, you—”

“Excuse me; I was able to deliver it almost immediately after receiving
your commission, and I gave it, too, just as you asked me to. It has
come into my hands now because Aglaya Ivanovna has just returned it to
me.”

“How? When?”

“As soon as I finished writing in her album for her, and when she asked
me to come out of the room with her (you heard?), we went into the
dining-room, and she gave me your letter to read, and then told me to
return it.”

“To _read?_” cried Gania, almost at the top of his voice; “to _read_,
and you read it?”

And again he stood like a log in the middle of the pavement; so amazed
that his mouth remained open after the last word had left it.

“Yes, I have just read it.”

“And she gave it you to read herself—_herself?_”

“Yes, herself; and you may believe me when I tell you that I would not
have read it for anything without her permission.”

Gania was silent for a minute or two, as though thinking out some
problem. Suddenly he cried:

“It’s impossible, she cannot have given it to you to read! You are
lying. You read it yourself!”

“I am telling you the truth,” said the prince in his former composed
tone of voice; “and believe me, I am extremely sorry that the
circumstance should have made such an unpleasant impression upon you!”

“But, you wretched man, at least she must have said something? There
must be _some_ answer from her!”

“Yes, of course, she did say something!”

“Out with it then, damn it! Out with it at once!” and Gania stamped his
foot twice on the pavement.

“As soon as I had finished reading it, she told me that you were
fishing for her; that you wished to compromise her so far as to receive
some hopes from her, trusting to which hopes you might break with the
prospect of receiving a hundred thousand roubles. She said that if you
had done this without bargaining with her, if you had broken with the
money prospects without trying to force a guarantee out of her first,
she might have been your friend. That’s all, I think. Oh no, when I
asked her what I was to say, as I took the letter, she replied that ‘no
answer is the best answer.’ I think that was it. Forgive me if I do not
use her exact expressions. I tell you the sense as I understood it
myself.”

Ungovernable rage and madness took entire possession of Gania, and his
fury burst out without the least attempt at restraint.

“Oh! that’s it, is it!” he yelled. “She throws my letters out of the
window, does she! Oh! and she does not condescend to bargain, while I
_do_, eh? We shall see, we shall see! I shall pay her out for this.”

He twisted himself about with rage, and grew paler and paler; he shook
his fist. So the pair walked along a few steps. Gania did not stand on
ceremony with the prince; he behaved just as though he were alone in
his room. He clearly counted the latter as a nonentity. But suddenly he
seemed to have an idea, and recollected himself.

“But how was it?” he asked, “how was it that you (idiot that you are),”
he added to himself, “were so very confidential a couple of hours after
your first meeting with these people? How was that, eh?”

Up to this moment jealousy had not been one of his torments; now it
suddenly gnawed at his heart.

“That is a thing I cannot undertake to explain,” replied the prince.
Gania looked at him with angry contempt.

“Oh! I suppose the present she wished to make to you, when she took you
into the dining-room, was her confidence, eh?”

“I suppose that was it; I cannot explain it otherwise.”

“But why, _why?_ Devil take it, what did you do in there? Why did they
fancy you? Look here, can’t you remember exactly what you said to them,
from the very beginning? Can’t you remember?”

“Oh, we talked of a great many things. When first I went in we began to
speak of Switzerland.”

“Oh, the devil take Switzerland!”

“Then about executions.”

“Executions?”

“Yes—at least about one. Then I told the whole three years’ story of my
life, and the history of a poor peasant girl—”

“Oh, damn the peasant girl! go on, go on!” said Gania, impatiently.

“Then how Schneider told me about my childish nature, and—”

“Oh, _curse_ Schneider and his dirty opinions! Go on.”

“Then I began to talk about faces, at least about the _expressions_ of
faces, and said that Aglaya Ivanovna was nearly as lovely as Nastasia
Philipovna. It was then I blurted out about the portrait—”

“But you didn’t repeat what you heard in the study? You didn’t repeat
that—eh?”

“No, I tell you I did _not_.”

“Then how did they—look here! Did Aglaya show my letter to the old
lady?”

“Oh, there I can give you my fullest assurance that she did _not_. I
was there all the while—she had no time to do it!”

“But perhaps you may not have observed it, oh, you damned idiot, you!”
he shouted, quite beside himself with fury. “You can’t even describe
what went on.”

Gania having once descended to abuse, and receiving no check, very soon
knew no bounds or limit to his licence, as is often the way in such
cases. His rage so blinded him that he had not even been able to detect
that this “idiot,” whom he was abusing to such an extent, was very far
from being slow of comprehension, and had a way of taking in an
impression, and afterwards giving it out again, which was very
un-idiotic indeed. But something a little unforeseen now occurred.

“I think I ought to tell you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” said the prince,
suddenly, “that though I once was so ill that I really was little
better than an idiot, yet now I am almost recovered, and that,
therefore, it is not altogether pleasant to be called an idiot to my
face. Of course your anger is excusable, considering the treatment you
have just experienced; but I must remind you that you have twice abused
me rather rudely. I do not like this sort of thing, and especially so
at the first time of meeting a man, and, therefore, as we happen to be
at this moment standing at a crossroad, don’t you think we had better
part, you to the left, homewards, and I to the right, here? I have
twenty-five roubles, and I shall easily find a lodging.”

Gania was much confused, and blushed for shame “Do forgive me, prince!”
he cried, suddenly changing his abusive tone for one of great courtesy.
“For Heaven’s sake, forgive me! You see what a miserable plight I am
in, but you hardly know anything of the facts of the case as yet. If
you did, I am sure you would forgive me, at least partially. Of course
it was inexcusable of me, I know, but—”

“Oh, dear me, I really do not require such profuse apologies,” replied
the prince, hastily. “I quite understand how unpleasant your position
is, and that is what made you abuse me. So come along to your house,
after all. I shall be delighted—”

“I am not going to let him go like this,” thought Gania, glancing
angrily at the prince as they walked along. “The fellow has sucked
everything out of me, and now he takes off his mask—there’s something
more than appears, here we shall see. It shall all be as clear as water
by tonight, everything!”

But by this time they had reached Gania’s house.

VIII.

The flat occupied by Gania and his family was on the third floor of the
house. It was reached by a clean light staircase, and consisted of
seven rooms, a nice enough lodging, and one would have thought a little
too good for a clerk on two thousand roubles a year. But it was
designed to accommodate a few lodgers on board terms, and had been
taken a few months since, much to the disgust of Gania, at the urgent
request of his mother and his sister, Varvara Ardalionovna, who longed
to do something to increase the family income a little, and fixed their
hopes upon letting lodgings. Gania frowned upon the idea. He thought it
_infra dig_, and did not quite like appearing in society
afterwards—that society in which he had been accustomed to pose up to
now as a young man of rather brilliant prospects. All these concessions
and rebuffs of fortune, of late, had wounded his spirit severely, and
his temper had become extremely irritable, his wrath being generally
quite out of proportion to the cause. But if he had made up his mind to
put up with this sort of life for a while, it was only on the plain
understanding with his inner self that he would very soon change it
all, and have things as he chose again. Yet the very means by which he
hoped to make this change threatened to involve him in even greater
difficulties than he had had before.

The flat was divided by a passage which led straight out of the
entrance-hall. Along one side of this corridor lay the three rooms
which were designed for the accommodation of the “highly recommended”
lodgers. Besides these three rooms there was another small one at the
end of the passage, close to the kitchen, which was allotted to General
Ivolgin, the nominal master of the house, who slept on a wide sofa, and
was obliged to pass into and out of his room through the kitchen, and
up or down the back stairs. Colia, Gania’s young brother, a school-boy
of thirteen, shared this room with his father. He, too, had to sleep on
an old sofa, a narrow, uncomfortable thing with a torn rug over it; his
chief duty being to look after his father, who needed to be watched
more and more every day.

The prince was given the middle room of the three, the first being
occupied by one Ferdishenko, while the third was empty.

But Gania first conducted the prince to the family apartments. These
consisted of a “salon,” which became the dining-room when required; a
drawing-room, which was only a drawing-room in the morning, and became
Gania’s study in the evening, and his bedroom at night; and lastly Nina
Alexandrovna’s and Varvara’s bedroom, a small, close chamber which they
shared together.

In a word, the whole place was confined, and a “tight fit” for the
party. Gania used to grind his teeth with rage over the state of
affairs; though he was anxious to be dutiful and polite to his mother.
However, it was very soon apparent to anyone coming into the house,
that Gania was the tyrant of the family.

Nina Alexandrovna and her daughter were both seated in the
drawing-room, engaged in knitting, and talking to a visitor, Ivan
Petrovitch Ptitsin.

The lady of the house appeared to be a woman of about fifty years of
age, thin-faced, and with black lines under the eyes. She looked ill
and rather sad; but her face was a pleasant one for all that; and from
the first word that fell from her lips, any stranger would at once
conclude that she was of a serious and particularly sincere nature. In
spite of her sorrowful expression, she gave the idea of possessing
considerable firmness and decision.

Her dress was modest and simple to a degree, dark and elderly in style;
but both her face and appearance gave evidence that she had seen better
days.

Varvara was a girl of some twenty-three summers, of middle height,
thin, but possessing a face which, without being actually beautiful,
had the rare quality of charm, and might fascinate even to the extent
of passionate regard.

She was very like her mother: she even dressed like her, which proved
that she had no taste for smart clothes. The expression of her grey
eyes was merry and gentle, when it was not, as lately, too full of
thought and anxiety. The same decision and firmness was to be observed
in her face as in her mother’s, but her strength seemed to be more
vigorous than that of Nina Alexandrovna. She was subject to outbursts
of temper, of which even her brother was a little afraid.

The present visitor, Ptitsin, was also afraid of her. This was a young
fellow of something under thirty, dressed plainly, but neatly. His
manners were good, but rather ponderously so. His dark beard bore
evidence to the fact that he was not in any government employ. He could
speak well, but preferred silence. On the whole he made a decidedly
agreeable impression. He was clearly attracted by Varvara, and made no
secret of his feelings. She trusted him in a friendly way, but had not
shown him any decided encouragement as yet, which fact did not quell
his ardour in the least.

Nina Alexandrovna was very fond of him, and had grown quite
confidential with him of late. Ptitsin, as was well known, was engaged
in the business of lending out money on good security, and at a good
rate of interest. He was a great friend of Gania’s.

After a formal introduction by Gania (who greeted his mother very
shortly, took no notice of his sister, and immediately marched Ptitsin
out of the room), Nina Alexandrovna addressed a few kind words to the
prince and forthwith requested Colia, who had just appeared at the
door, to show him to the “middle room.”

Colia was a nice-looking boy. His expression was simple and confiding,
and his manners were very polite and engaging.

“Where’s your luggage?” he asked, as he led the prince away to his
room.

“I had a bundle; it’s in the entrance hall.”

“I’ll bring it you directly. We only have a cook and one maid, so I
have to help as much as I can. Varia looks after things, generally, and
loses her temper over it. Gania says you have only just arrived from
Switzerland?”

“Yes.”

“Is it jolly there?”

“Very.”

“Mountains?”

“Yes.”

“I’ll go and get your bundle.”

Here Varvara joined them.

“The maid shall bring your bed-linen directly. Have you a portmanteau?”

“No; a bundle—your brother has just gone to the hall for it.”

“There’s nothing there except this,” said Colia, returning at this
moment. “Where did you put it?”

“Oh! but that’s all I have,” said the prince, taking it.

“Ah! I thought perhaps Ferdishenko had taken it.”

“Don’t talk nonsense,” said Varia, severely. She seemed put out, and
was only just polite with the prince.

“Oho!” laughed the boy, “you can be nicer than that to _me_, you
know—I’m not Ptitsin!”

“You ought to be whipped, Colia, you silly boy. If you want anything”
(to the prince) “please apply to the servant. We dine at half-past
four. You can take your dinner with us, or have it in your room, just
as you please. Come along, Colia, don’t disturb the prince.”

At the door they met Gania coming in.

“Is father in?” he asked. Colia whispered something in his ear and went
out.

“Just a couple of words, prince, if you’ll excuse me. Don’t blab over
_there_ about what you may see here, or in this house as to all that
about Aglaya and me, you know. Things are not altogether pleasant in
this establishment—devil take it all! You’ll see. At all events keep
your tongue to yourself for _today_.”

“I assure you I ‘blabbed’ a great deal less than you seem to suppose,”
said the prince, with some annoyance. Clearly the relations between
Gania and himself were by no means improving.

“Oh well; I caught it quite hot enough today, thanks to you. However, I
forgive you.”

“I think you might fairly remember that I was not in any way bound, I
had no reason to be silent about that portrait. You never asked me not
to mention it.”

“Pfu! what a wretched room this is—dark, and the window looking into
the yard. Your coming to our house is, in no respect, opportune.
However, it’s not _my_ affair. I don’t keep the lodgings.”

Ptitsin here looked in and beckoned to Gania, who hastily left the
room, in spite of the fact that he had evidently wished to say
something more and had only made the remark about the room to gain
time. The prince had hardly had time to wash and tidy himself a little
when the door opened once more, and another figure appeared.

This was a gentleman of about thirty, tall, broad-shouldered, and
red-haired; his face was red, too, and he possessed a pair of thick
lips, a wide nose, small eyes, rather bloodshot, and with an ironical
expression in them; as though he were perpetually winking at someone.
His whole appearance gave one the idea of impudence; his dress was
shabby.

He opened the door just enough to let his head in. His head remained so
placed for a few seconds while he quietly scrutinized the room; the
door then opened enough to admit his body; but still he did not enter.
He stood on the threshold and examined the prince carefully. At last he
gave the door a final shove, entered, approached the prince, took his
hand and seated himself and the owner of the room on two chairs side by
side.

“Ferdishenko,” he said, gazing intently and inquiringly into the
prince’s eyes.

“Very well, what next?” said the latter, almost laughing in his face.

“A lodger here,” continued the other, staring as before.

“Do you wish to make acquaintance?” asked the prince.

“Ah!” said the visitor, passing his fingers through his hair and
sighing. He then looked over to the other side of the room and around
it. “Got any money?” he asked, suddenly.

“Not much.”

“How much?”

“Twenty-five roubles.”

“Let’s see it.”

The prince took his banknote out and showed it to Ferdishenko. The
latter unfolded it and looked at it; then he turned it round and
examined the other side; then he held it up to the light.

“How strange that it should have browned so,” he said, reflectively.
“These twenty-five rouble notes brown in a most extraordinary way,
while other notes often grow paler. Take it.”

The prince took his note. Ferdishenko rose.

“I came here to warn you,” he said. “In the first place, don’t lend me
any money, for I shall certainly ask you to.”

“Very well.”

“Shall you pay here?”

“Yes, I intend to.”

“Oh! I _don’t_ intend to. Thanks. I live here, next door to you; you
noticed a room, did you? Don’t come to me very often; I shall see you
here quite often enough. Have you seen the general?”

“No.”

“Nor heard him?”

“No; of course not.”

“Well, you’ll both hear and see him soon; he even tries to borrow money
from me. _Avis au lecteur._ Good-bye; do you think a man can possibly
live with a name like Ferdishenko?”

“Why not?”

“Good-bye.”

And so he departed. The prince found out afterwards that this gentleman
made it his business to amaze people with his originality and wit, but
that it did not as a rule “come off.” He even produced a bad impression
on some people, which grieved him sorely; but he did not change his
ways for all that.

As he went out of the prince’s room, he collided with yet another
visitor coming in. Ferdishenko took the opportunity of making several
warning gestures to the prince from behind the new arrival’s back, and
left the room in conscious pride.

This next arrival was a tall red-faced man of about fifty-five, with
greyish hair and whiskers, and large eyes which stood out of their
sockets. His appearance would have been distinguished had it not been
that he gave the idea of being rather dirty. He was dressed in an old
coat, and he smelled of vodka when he came near. His walk was
effective, and he clearly did his best to appear dignified, and to
impress people by his manner.

This gentleman now approached the prince slowly, and with a most
courteous smile; silently took his hand and held it in his own, as he
examined the prince’s features as though searching for familiar traits
therein.

“‘Tis he, ‘tis he!” he said at last, quietly, but with much solemnity.
“As though he were alive once more. I heard the familiar name—the dear
familiar name—and, oh! how it reminded me of the irrevocable
past—Prince Muishkin, I believe?”

“Exactly so.”

“General Ivolgin—retired and unfortunate. May I ask your Christian and
generic names?”

“Lef Nicolaievitch.”

“So, so—the son of my old, I may say my childhood’s friend, Nicolai
Petrovitch.”

“My father’s name was Nicolai Lvovitch.”

“Lvovitch,” repeated the general without the slightest haste, and with
perfect confidence, just as though he had not committed himself the
least in the world, but merely made a little slip of the tongue. He sat
down, and taking the prince’s hand, drew him to a seat next to himself.

“I carried you in my arms as a baby,” he observed.

“Really?” asked the prince. “Why, it’s twenty years since my father
died.”

“Yes, yes—twenty years and three months. We were educated together; I
went straight into the army, and he—”

“My father went into the army, too. He was a sub-lieutenant in the
Vasiliefsky regiment.”

“No, sir—in the Bielomirsky; he changed into the latter shortly before
his death. I was at his bedside when he died, and gave him my blessing
for eternity. Your mother—” The general paused, as though overcome with
emotion.

“She died a few months later, from a cold,” said the prince.

“Oh, not cold—believe an old man—not from a cold, but from grief for
her prince. Oh—your mother, your mother! heigh-ho! Youth—youth! Your
father and I—old friends as we were—nearly murdered each other for her
sake.”

The prince began to be a little incredulous.

“I was passionately in love with her when she was engaged—engaged to my
friend. The prince noticed the fact and was furious. He came and woke
me at seven o’clock one morning. I rise and dress in amazement; silence
on both sides. I understand it all. He takes a couple of pistols out of
his pocket—across a handkerchief—without witnesses. Why invite
witnesses when both of us would be walking in eternity in a couple of
minutes? The pistols are loaded; we stretch the handkerchief and stand
opposite one another. We aim the pistols at each other’s hearts.
Suddenly tears start to our eyes, our hands shake; we weep, we
embrace—the battle is one of self-sacrifice now! The prince shouts,
‘She is yours;’ I cry, ‘She is yours—’ in a word, in a word—You’ve come
to live with us, hey?”

“Yes—yes—for a while, I think,” stammered the prince.

“Prince, mother begs you to come to her,” said Colia, appearing at the
door.

The prince rose to go, but the general once more laid his hand in a
friendly manner on his shoulder, and dragged him down on to the sofa.

“As the true friend of your father, I wish to say a few words to you,”
he began. “I have suffered—there was a catastrophe. I suffered without
a trial; I had no trial. Nina Alexandrovna my wife, is an excellent
woman, so is my daughter Varvara. We have to let lodgings because we
are poor—a dreadful, unheard-of come-down for us—for me, who should
have been a governor-general; but we are very glad to have _you_, at
all events. Meanwhile there is a tragedy in the house.”

The prince looked inquiringly at the other.

“Yes, a marriage is being arranged—a marriage between a questionable
woman and a young fellow who might be a flunkey. They wish to bring
this woman into the house where my wife and daughter reside, but while
I live and breathe she shall never enter my doors. I shall lie at the
threshold, and she shall trample me underfoot if she does. I hardly
talk to Gania now, and avoid him as much as I can. I warn you of this
beforehand, but you cannot fail to observe it. But you are the son of
my old friend, and I hope—”

“Prince, be so kind as to come to me for a moment in the drawing-room,”
said Nina Alexandrovna herself, appearing at the door.

“Imagine, my dear,” cried the general, “it turns out that I have nursed
the prince on my knee in the old days.” His wife looked searchingly at
him, and glanced at the prince, but said nothing. The prince rose and
followed her; but hardly had they reached the drawing-room, and Nina
Alexandrovna had begun to talk hurriedly, when in came the general. She
immediately relapsed into silence. The master of the house may have
observed this, but at all events he did not take any notice of it; he
was in high good humour.

“A son of my old friend, dear,” he cried; “surely you must remember
Prince Nicolai Lvovitch? You saw him at—at Tver.”

“I don’t remember any Nicolai Lvovitch. Was that your father?” she
inquired of the prince.

“Yes, but he died at Elizabethgrad, not at Tver,” said the prince,
rather timidly. “So Pavlicheff told me.”

“No, Tver,” insisted the general; “he removed just before his death.
You were very small and cannot remember; and Pavlicheff, though an
excellent fellow, may have made a mistake.”

“You knew Pavlicheff then?”

“Oh, yes—a wonderful fellow; but I was present myself. I gave him my
blessing.”

“My father was just about to be tried when he died,” said the prince,
“although I never knew of what he was accused. He died in hospital.”

“Oh! it was the Kolpakoff business, and of course he would have been
acquitted.”

“Yes? Do you know that for a fact?” asked the prince, whose curiosity
was aroused by the general’s words.

“I should think so indeed!” cried the latter. “The court-martial came
to no decision. It was a mysterious, an impossible business, one might
say! Captain Larionoff, commander of the company, had died; his command
was handed over to the prince for the moment. Very well. This soldier,
Kolpakoff, stole some leather from one of his comrades, intending to
sell it, and spent the money on drink. Well! The prince—you understand
that what follows took place in the presence of the sergeant-major, and
a corporal—the prince rated Kolpakoff soundly, and threatened to have
him flogged. Well, Kolpakoff went back to the barracks, lay down on a
camp bedstead, and in a quarter of an hour was dead: you quite
understand? It was, as I said, a strange, almost impossible, affair. In
due course Kolpakoff was buried; the prince wrote his report, the
deceased’s name was removed from the roll. All as it should be, is it
not? But exactly three months later at the inspection of the brigade,
the man Kolpakoff was found in the third company of the second
battalion of infantry, Novozemlianski division, just as if nothing had
happened!”

“What?” said the prince, much astonished.

“It did not occur—it’s a mistake!” said Nina Alexandrovna quickly,
looking, at the prince rather anxiously. “_Mon mari se trompe_,” she
added, speaking in French.

“My dear, ‘_se trompe_’ is easily said. Do you remember any case at all
like it? Everybody was at their wits’ end. I should be the first to say
‘_qu’on se trompe_,’ but unfortunately I was an eye-witness, and was
also on the commission of inquiry. Everything proved that it was really
he, the very same soldier Kolpakoff who had been given the usual
military funeral to the sound of the drum. It is of course a most
curious case—nearly an impossible one. I recognize that... but—”

“Father, your dinner is ready,” said Varvara at this point, putting her
head in at the door.

“Very glad, I’m particularly hungry. Yes, yes, a strange
coincidence—almost a psychological—”

“Your soup’ll be cold; do come.”

“Coming, coming,” said the general. “Son of my old friend—” he was
heard muttering as he went down the passage.

“You will have to excuse very much in my husband, if you stay with us,”
said Nina Alexandrovna; “but he will not disturb you often. He dines
alone. Everyone has his little peculiarities, you know, and some people
perhaps have more than those who are most pointed at and laughed at.
One thing I must beg of you—if my husband applies to you for payment
for board and lodging, tell him that you have already paid me. Of
course anything paid by you to the general would be as fully settled as
if paid to me, so far as you are concerned; but I wish it to be so, if
you please, for convenience’ sake. What is it, Varia?”

Varia had quietly entered the room, and was holding out the portrait of
Nastasia Philipovna to her mother.

Nina Alexandrovna started, and examined the photograph intently, gazing
at it long and sadly. At last she looked up inquiringly at Varia.

“It’s a present from herself to him,” said Varia; “the question is to
be finally decided this evening.”

“This evening!” repeated her mother in a tone of despair, but softly,
as though to herself. “Then it’s all settled, of course, and there’s no
hope left to us. She has anticipated her answer by the present of her
portrait. Did he show it you himself?” she added, in some surprise.

“You know we have hardly spoken to each other for a whole month.
Ptitsin told me all about it; and the photo was lying under the table,
and I picked it up.”

“Prince,” asked Nina Alexandrovna, “I wanted to inquire whether you
have known my son long? I think he said that you had only arrived today
from somewhere.”

The prince gave a short narrative of what we have heard before, leaving
out the greater part. The two ladies listened intently.

“I did not ask about Gania out of curiosity,” said the elder, at last.
“I wish to know how much you know about him, because he said just now
that we need not stand on ceremony with you. What, exactly, does that
mean?”

At this moment Gania and Ptitsin entered the room together, and Nina
Alexandrovna immediately became silent again. The prince remained
seated next to her, but Varia moved to the other end of the room; the
portrait of Nastasia Philipovna remained lying as before on the
work-table. Gania observed it there, and with a frown of annoyance
snatched it up and threw it across to his writing-table, which stood at
the other end of the room.

“Is it today, Gania?” asked Nina Alexandrovna, at last.

“Is what today?” cried the former. Then suddenly recollecting himself,
he turned sharply on the prince. “Oh,” he growled, “I see, you are
here, that explains it! Is it a disease, or what, that you can’t hold
your tongue? Look here, understand once for all, prince—”

“I am to blame in this, Gania—no one else,” said Ptitsin.

Gania glanced inquiringly at the speaker.

“It’s better so, you know, Gania—especially as, from one point of view,
the matter may be considered as settled,” said Ptitsin; and sitting
down a little way from the table he began to study a paper covered with
pencil writing.

Gania stood and frowned, he expected a family scene. He never thought
of apologizing to the prince, however.

“If it’s all settled, Gania, then of course Mr. Ptitsin is right,” said
Nina Alexandrovna. “Don’t frown. You need not worry yourself, Gania; I
shall ask you no questions. You need not tell me anything you don’t
like. I assure you I have quite submitted to your will.” She said all
this, knitting away the while as though perfectly calm and composed.

Gania was surprised, but cautiously kept silence and looked at his
mother, hoping that she would express herself more clearly. Nina
Alexandrovna observed his cautiousness and added, with a bitter smile:

“You are still suspicious, I see, and do not believe me; but you may be
quite at your ease. There shall be no more tears, nor questions—not
from my side, at all events. All I wish is that you may be happy, you
know that. I have submitted to my fate; but my heart will always be
with you, whether we remain united, or whether we part. Of course I
only answer for myself—you can hardly expect your sister—”

“My sister again,” cried Gania, looking at her with contempt and almost
hate. “Look here, mother, I have already given you my word that I shall
always respect you fully and absolutely, and so shall everyone else in
this house, be it who it may, who shall cross this threshold.”

Gania was so much relieved that he gazed at his mother almost
affectionately.

“I was not at all afraid for myself, Gania, as you know well. It was
not for my own sake that I have been so anxious and worried all this
time! They say it is all to be settled to-day. What is to be settled?”

“She has promised to tell me tonight at her own house whether she
consents or not,” replied Gania.

“We have been silent on this subject for three weeks,” said his mother,
“and it was better so; and now I will only ask you one question. How
can she give her consent and make you a present of her portrait when
you do not love her? How can such a—such a—”

“Practised hand—eh?”

“I was not going to express myself so. But how could you so blind her?”

Nina Alexandrovna’s question betrayed intense annoyance. Gania waited a
moment and then said, without taking the trouble to conceal the irony
of his tone:

“There you are, mother, you are always like that. You begin by
promising that there are to be no reproaches or insinuations or
questions, and here you are beginning them at once. We had better drop
the subject—we had, really. I shall never leave you, mother; any other
man would cut and run from such a sister as this. See how she is
looking at me at this moment! Besides, how do you know that I am
blinding Nastasia Philipovna? As for Varia, I don’t care—she can do
just as she pleases. There, that’s quite enough!”

Gania’s irritation increased with every word he uttered, as he walked
up and down the room. These conversations always touched the family
sores before long.

“I have said already that the moment she comes in I go out, and I shall
keep my word,” remarked Varia.

“Out of obstinacy” shouted Gania. “You haven’t married, either, thanks
to your obstinacy. Oh, you needn’t frown at me, Varvara! You can go at
once for all I care; I am sick enough of your company. What, you are
going to leave us are you, too?” he cried, turning to the prince, who
was rising from his chair.

Gania’s voice was full of the most uncontrolled and uncontrollable
irritation.

The prince turned at the door to say something, but perceiving in
Gania’s expression that there was but that one drop wanting to make the
cup overflow, he changed his mind and left the room without a word. A
few minutes later he was aware from the noisy voices in the drawing
room, that the conversation had become more quarrelsome than ever after
his departure.

He crossed the salon and the entrance-hall, so as to pass down the
corridor into his own room. As he came near the front door he heard
someone outside vainly endeavouring to ring the bell, which was
evidently broken, and only shook a little, without emitting any sound.

The prince took down the chain and opened the door. He started back in
amazement—for there stood Nastasia Philipovna. He knew her at once from
her photograph. Her eyes blazed with anger as she looked at him. She
quickly pushed by him into the hall, shouldering him out of her way,
and said, furiously, as she threw off her fur cloak:

“If you are too lazy to mend your bell, you should at least wait in the
hall to let people in when they rattle the bell handle. There, now,
you’ve dropped my fur cloak—dummy!”

Sure enough the cloak was lying on the ground. Nastasia had thrown it
off her towards the prince, expecting him to catch it, but the prince
had missed it.

“Now then—announce me, quick!”

The prince wanted to say something, but was so confused and astonished
that he could not. However, he moved off towards the drawing-room with
the cloak over his arm.

“Now then, where are you taking my cloak to? Ha, ha, ha! Are you mad?”

The prince turned and came back, more confused than ever. When she
burst out laughing, he smiled, but his tongue could not form a word as
yet. At first, when he had opened the door and saw her standing before
him, he had become as pale as death; but now the red blood had rushed
back to his cheeks in a torrent.

“Why, what an idiot it is!” cried Nastasia, stamping her foot with
irritation. “Go on, do! Whom are you going to announce?”

“Nastasia Philipovna,” murmured the prince.

“And how do you know that?” she asked him, sharply.

“I have never seen you before!”

“Go on, announce me—what’s that noise?”

“They are quarrelling,” said the prince, and entered the drawing-room,
just as matters in there had almost reached a crisis. Nina Alexandrovna
had forgotten that she had “submitted to everything!” She was defending
Varia. Ptitsin was taking her part, too. Not that Varia was afraid of
standing up for herself. She was by no means that sort of a girl; but
her brother was becoming ruder and more intolerable every moment. Her
usual practice in such cases as the present was to say nothing, but
stare at him, without taking her eyes off his face for an instant. This
manoeuvre, as she well knew, could drive Gania distracted.

Just at this moment the door opened and the prince entered, announcing:

“Nastasia Philipovna!”

IX.

Silence immediately fell on the room; all looked at the prince as
though they neither understood, nor hoped to understand. Gania was
motionless with horror.

Nastasia’s arrival was a most unexpected and overwhelming event to all
parties. In the first place, she had never been before. Up to now she
had been so haughty that she had never even asked Gania to introduce
her to his parents. Of late she had not so much as mentioned them.
Gania was partly glad of this; but still he had put it to her debit in
the account to be settled after marriage.

He would have borne anything from her rather than this visit. But one
thing seemed to him quite clear—her visit now, and the present of her
portrait on this particular day, pointed out plainly enough which way
she intended to make her decision!

The incredulous amazement with which all regarded the prince did not
last long, for Nastasia herself appeared at the door and passed in,
pushing by the prince again.

“At last I’ve stormed the citadel! Why do you tie up your bell?” she
said, merrily, as she pressed Gania’s hand, the latter having rushed up
to her as soon as she made her appearance. “What are you looking so
upset about? Introduce me, please!”

The bewildered Gania introduced her first to Varia, and both women,
before shaking hands, exchanged looks of strange import. Nastasia,
however, smiled amiably; but Varia did not try to look amiable, and
kept her gloomy expression. She did not even vouchsafe the usual
courteous smile of etiquette. Gania darted a terrible glance of wrath
at her for this, but Nina Alexandrovna mended matters a little when
Gania introduced her at last. Hardly, however, had the old lady begun
about her “highly gratified feelings,” and so on, when Nastasia left
her, and flounced into a chair by Gania’s side in the corner by the
window, and cried: “Where’s your study? and where are the—the lodgers?
You do take in lodgers, don’t you?”

Gania looked dreadfully put out, and tried to say something in reply,
but Nastasia interrupted him:

“Why, where are you going to squeeze lodgers in here? Don’t you use a
study? Does this sort of thing pay?” she added, turning to Nina
Alexandrovna.

“Well, it is troublesome, rather,” said the latter; “but I suppose it
will ‘pay’ pretty well. We have only just begun, however—”

Again Nastasia Philipovna did not hear the sentence out. She glanced at
Gania, and cried, laughing, “What a face! My goodness, what a face you
have on at this moment!”

Indeed, Gania did not look in the least like himself. His bewilderment
and his alarmed perplexity passed off, however, and his lips now
twitched with rage as he continued to stare evilly at his laughing
guest, while his countenance became absolutely livid.

There was another witness, who, though standing at the door motionless
and bewildered himself, still managed to remark Gania’s death-like
pallor, and the dreadful change that had come over his face. This
witness was the prince, who now advanced in alarm and muttered to
Gania:

“Drink some water, and don’t look like that!”

It was clear that he came out with these words quite spontaneously, on
the spur of the moment. But his speech was productive of much—for it
appeared that all Gania’s rage now overflowed upon the prince. He
seized him by the shoulder and gazed with an intensity of loathing and
revenge at him, but said nothing—as though his feelings were too strong
to permit of words.

General agitation prevailed. Nina Alexandrovna gave a little cry of
anxiety; Ptitsin took a step forward in alarm; Colia and Ferdishenko
stood stock still at the door in amazement;—only Varia remained coolly
watching the scene from under her eyelashes. She did not sit down, but
stood by her mother with folded hands. However, Gania recollected
himself almost immediately. He let go of the prince and burst out
laughing.

“Why, are you a doctor, prince, or what?” he asked, as naturally as
possible. “I declare you quite frightened me! Nastasia Philipovna, let
me introduce this interesting character to you—though I have only known
him myself since the morning.”

Nastasia gazed at the prince in bewilderment. “Prince? He a Prince?
Why, I took him for the footman, just now, and sent him in to announce
me! Ha, ha, ha, isn’t that good!”

“Not bad that, not bad at all!” put in Ferdishenko, “_se non è vero_—”

“I rather think I pitched into you, too, didn’t I? Forgive me—do! Who
is he, did you say? What prince? Muishkin?” she added, addressing
Gania.

“He is a lodger of ours,” explained the latter.

“An idiot!”—the prince distinctly heard the word half whispered from
behind him. This was Ferdishenko’s voluntary information for Nastasia’s
benefit.

“Tell me, why didn’t you put me right when I made such a dreadful
mistake just now?” continued the latter, examining the prince from head
to foot without the slightest ceremony. She awaited the answer as
though convinced that it would be so foolish that she must inevitably
fail to restrain her laughter over it.

“I was astonished, seeing you so suddenly—” murmured the prince.

“How did you know who I was? Where had you seen me before? And why were
you so struck dumb at the sight of me? What was there so overwhelming
about me?”

“Oho! ho, ho, ho!” cried Ferdishenko. “_Now_ then, prince! My word,
what things I would say if I had such a chance as that! My goodness,
prince—go on!”

“So should I, in your place, I’ve no doubt!” laughed the prince to
Ferdishenko; then continued, addressing Nastasia: “Your portrait struck
me very forcibly this morning; then I was talking about you to the
Epanchins; and then, in the train, before I reached Petersburg, Parfen
Rogojin told me a good deal about you; and at the very moment that I
opened the door to you I happened to be thinking of you, when—there you
stood before me!”

“And how did you recognize me?”

“From the portrait!”

“What else?”

“I seemed to imagine you exactly as you are—I seemed to have seen you
somewhere.”

“Where—where?”

“I seem to have seen your eyes somewhere; but it cannot be! I have not
seen you—I never was here before. I may have dreamed of you, I don’t
know.”

The prince said all this with manifest effort—in broken sentences, and
with many drawings of breath. He was evidently much agitated. Nastasia
Philipovna looked at him inquisitively, but did not laugh.

“Bravo, prince!” cried Ferdishenko, delighted.

At this moment a loud voice from behind the group which hedged in the
prince and Nastasia Philipovna, divided the crowd, as it were, and
before them stood the head of the family, General Ivolgin. He was
dressed in evening clothes; his moustache was dyed.

This apparition was too much for Gania. Vain and ambitious almost to
morbidness, he had had much to put up with in the last two months, and
was seeking feverishly for some means of enabling himself to lead a
more presentable kind of existence. At home, he now adopted an attitude
of absolute cynicism, but he could not keep this up before Nastasia
Philipovna, although he had sworn to make her pay after marriage for
all he suffered now. He was experiencing a last humiliation, the
bitterest of all, at this moment—the humiliation of blushing for his
own kindred in his own house. A question flashed through his mind as to
whether the game was really worth the candle.

For that had happened at this moment, which for two months had been his
nightmare; which had filled his soul with dread and shame—the meeting
between his father and Nastasia Philipovna. He had often tried to
imagine such an event, but had found the picture too mortifying and
exasperating, and had quietly dropped it. Very likely he anticipated
far worse things than was at all necessary; it is often so with vain
persons. He had long since determined, therefore, to get his father out
of the way, anywhere, before his marriage, in order to avoid such a
meeting; but when Nastasia entered the room just now, he had been so
overwhelmed with astonishment, that he had not thought of his father,
and had made no arrangements to keep him out of the way. And now it was
too late—there he was, and got up, too, in a dress coat and white tie,
and Nastasia in the very humour to heap ridicule on him and his family
circle; of this last fact, he felt quite persuaded. What else had she
come for? There were his mother and his sister sitting before her, and
she seemed to have forgotten their very existence already; and if she
behaved like that, he thought, she must have some object in view.

Ferdishenko led the general up to Nastasia Philipovna.

“Ardalion Alexandrovitch Ivolgin,” said the smiling general, with a low
bow of great dignity, “an old soldier, unfortunate, and the father of
this family; but happy in the hope of including in that family so
exquisite—”

He did not finish his sentence, for at this moment Ferdishenko pushed a
chair up from behind, and the general, not very firm on his legs, at
this post-prandial hour, flopped into it backwards. It was always a
difficult thing to put this warrior to confusion, and his sudden
descent left him as composed as before. He had sat down just opposite
to Nastasia, whose fingers he now took, and raised to his lips with
great elegance, and much courtesy. The general had once belonged to a
very select circle of society, but he had been turned out of it two or
three years since on account of certain weaknesses, in which he now
indulged with all the less restraint; but his good manners remained
with him to this day, in spite of all.

Nastasia Philipovna seemed delighted at the appearance of this latest
arrival, of whom she had of course heard a good deal by report.

“I have heard that my son—” began Ardalion Alexandrovitch.

“Your son, indeed! A nice papa you are! _You_ might have come to see me
anyhow, without compromising anyone. Do you hide yourself, or does your
son hide you?”

“The children of the nineteenth century, and their parents—” began the
general, again.

“Nastasia Philipovna, will you excuse the general for a moment? Someone
is inquiring for him,” said Nina Alexandrovna in a loud voice,
interrupting the conversation.

“Excuse him? Oh no, I have wished to see him too long for that. Why,
what business can he have? He has retired, hasn’t he? You won’t leave
me, general, will you?”

“I give you my word that he shall come and see you—but he—he needs rest
just now.”

“General, they say you require rest,” said Nastasia Philipovna, with
the melancholy face of a child whose toy is taken away.

Ardalion Alexandrovitch immediately did his best to make his foolish
position a great deal worse.

“My dear, my dear!” he said, solemnly and reproachfully, looking at his
wife, with one hand on his heart.

“Won’t you leave the room, mamma?” asked Varia, aloud.

“No, Varia, I shall sit it out to the end.”

Nastasia must have overheard both question and reply, but her vivacity
was not in the least damped. On the contrary, it seemed to increase.
She immediately overwhelmed the general once more with questions, and
within five minutes that gentleman was as happy as a king, and holding
forth at the top of his voice, amid the laughter of almost all who
heard him.

Colia jogged the prince’s arm.

“Can’t _you_ get him out of the room, somehow? _Do_, please,” and tears
of annoyance stood in the boy’s eyes. “Curse that Gania!” he muttered,
between his teeth.

“Oh yes, I knew General Epanchin well,” General Ivolgin was saying at
this moment; “he and Prince Nicolai Ivanovitch Muishkin—whose son I
have this day embraced after an absence of twenty years—and I, were
three inseparables. Alas one is in the grave, torn to pieces by
calumnies and bullets; another is now before you, still battling with
calumnies and bullets—”

“Bullets?” cried Nastasia.

“Yes, here in my chest. I received them at the siege of Kars, and I
feel them in bad weather now. And as to the third of our trio,
Epanchin, of course after that little affair with the poodle in the
railway carriage, it was all _up_ between us.”

“Poodle? What was that? And in a railway carriage? Dear me,” said
Nastasia, thoughtfully, as though trying to recall something to mind.

“Oh, just a silly, little occurrence, really not worth telling, about
Princess Bielokonski’s governess, Miss Smith, and—oh, it is really not
worth telling!”

“No, no, we must have it!” cried Nastasia merrily.

“Yes, of course,” said Ferdishenko. “C’est du nouveau.”

“Ardalion,” said Nina Alexandrovitch, entreatingly.

“Papa, you are wanted!” cried Colia.

“Well, it is a silly little story, in a few words,” began the delighted
general. “A couple of years ago, soon after the new railway was opened,
I had to go somewhere or other on business. Well, I took a first-class
ticket, sat down, and began to smoke, or rather _continued_ to smoke,
for I had lighted up before. I was alone in the carriage. Smoking is
not allowed, but is not prohibited either; it is half allowed—so to
speak, winked at. I had the window open.”

“Suddenly, just before the whistle, in came two ladies with a little
poodle, and sat down opposite to me; not bad-looking women; one was in
light blue, the other in black silk. The poodle, a beauty with a silver
collar, lay on light blue’s knee. They looked haughtily about, and
talked English together. I took no notice, just went on smoking. I
observed that the ladies were getting angry—over my cigar, doubtless.
One looked at me through her tortoise-shell eyeglass.

“I took no notice, because they never said a word. If they didn’t like
the cigar, why couldn’t they say so? Not a word, not a hint! Suddenly,
and without the very slightest suspicion of warning, ‘light blue’
seizes my cigar from between my fingers, and, wheugh! out of the window
with it! Well, on flew the train, and I sat bewildered, and the young
woman, tall and fair, and rather red in the face, too red, glared at me
with flashing eyes.

“I didn’t say a word, but with extreme courtesy, I may say with most
refined courtesy, I reached my finger and thumb over towards the
poodle, took it up delicately by the nape of the neck, and chucked it
out of the window, after the cigar. The train went flying on, and the
poodle’s yells were lost in the distance.”

“Oh, you naughty man!” cried Nastasia, laughing and clapping her hands
like a child.

“Bravo!” said Ferdishenko. Ptitsin laughed too, though he had been very
sorry to see the general appear. Even Colia laughed and said, “Bravo!”

“And I was right, truly right,” cried the general, with warmth and
solemnity, “for if cigars are forbidden in railway carriages, poodles
are much more so.”

“Well, and what did the lady do?” asked Nastasia, impatiently.

“She—ah, that’s where all the mischief of it lies!” replied Ivolgin,
frowning. “Without a word, as it were, of warning, she slapped me on
the cheek! An extraordinary woman!”

“And you?”

The general dropped his eyes, and elevated his brows; shrugged his
shoulders, tightened his lips, spread his hands, and remained silent.
At last he blurted out:

“I lost my head!”

“Did you hit her?”

“No, oh no!—there was a great flare-up, but I didn’t hit her! I had to
struggle a little, purely to defend myself; but the very devil was in
the business. It turned out that ‘light blue’ was an Englishwoman,
governess or something, at Princess Bielokonski’s, and the other woman
was one of the old-maid princesses Bielokonski. Well, everybody knows
what great friends the princess and Mrs. Epanchin are, so there was a
pretty kettle of fish. All the Bielokonskis went into mourning for the
poodle. Six princesses in tears, and the Englishwoman shrieking!

“Of course I wrote an apology, and called, but they would not receive
either me or my apology, and the Epanchins cut me, too!”

“But wait,” said Nastasia. “How is it that, five or six days since, I
read exactly the same story in the paper, as happening between a
Frenchman and an English girl? The cigar was snatched away exactly as
you describe, and the poodle was chucked out of the window after it.
The slapping came off, too, as in your case; and the girl’s dress was
light blue!”

The general blushed dreadfully; Colia blushed too; and Ptitsin turned
hastily away. Ferdishenko was the only one who laughed as gaily as
before. As to Gania, I need not say that he was miserable; he stood
dumb and wretched and took no notice of anybody.

“I assure you,” said the general, “that exactly the same thing happened
to myself!”

“I remembered there was some quarrel between father and Miss Smith, the
Bielokonski’s governess,” said Colia.

“How very curious, point for point the same anecdote, and happening at
different ends of Europe! Even the light blue dress the same,”
continued the pitiless Nastasia. “I must really send you the paper.”

“You must observe,” insisted the general, “that my experience was two
years earlier.”

“Ah! that’s it, no doubt!”

Nastasia Philipovna laughed hysterically.

“Father, will you hear a word from me outside!” said Gania, his voice
shaking with agitation, as he seized his father by the shoulder. His
eyes shone with a blaze of hatred.

At this moment there was a terrific bang at the front door, almost
enough to break it down. Some most unusual visitor must have arrived.
Colia ran to open.

X.

The entrance-hall suddenly became full of noise and people. To judge
from the sounds which penetrated to the drawing-room, a number of
people had already come in, and the stampede continued. Several voices
were talking and shouting at once; others were talking and shouting on
the stairs outside; it was evidently a most extraordinary visit that
was about to take place.

Everyone exchanged startled glances. Gania rushed out towards the
dining-room, but a number of men had already made their way in, and met
him.

“Ah! here he is, the Judas!” cried a voice which the prince recognized
at once. “How d’ye do, Gania, you old blackguard?”

“Yes, that’s the man!” said another voice.

There was no room for doubt in the prince’s mind: one of the voices was
Rogojin’s, and the other Lebedeff’s.

Gania stood at the door like a block and looked on in silence, putting
no obstacle in the way of their entrance, and ten or a dozen men
marched in behind Parfen Rogojin. They were a decidedly mixed-looking
collection, and some of them came in in their furs and caps. None of
them were quite drunk, but all appeared to be considerably excited.

They seemed to need each other’s support, morally, before they dared
come in; not one of them would have entered alone but with the rest
each one was brave enough. Even Rogojin entered rather cautiously at
the head of his troop; but he was evidently preoccupied. He appeared to
be gloomy and morose, and had clearly come with some end in view. All
the rest were merely chorus, brought in to support the chief character.
Besides Lebedeff there was the dandy Zalesheff, who came in without his
coat and hat, two or three others followed his example; the rest were
more uncouth. They included a couple of young merchants, a man in a
great-coat, a medical student, a little Pole, a small fat man who
laughed continuously, and an enormously tall stout one who apparently
put great faith in the strength of his fists. A couple of “ladies” of
some sort put their heads in at the front door, but did not dare come
any farther. Colia promptly banged the door in their faces and locked
it.

“Hallo, Gania, you blackguard! You didn’t expect Rogojin, eh?” said the
latter, entering the drawing-room, and stopping before Gania.

But at this moment he saw, seated before him, Nastasia Philipovna. He
had not dreamed of meeting her here, evidently, for her appearance
produced a marvellous effect upon him. He grew pale, and his lips
became actually blue.

“I suppose it is true, then!” he muttered to himself, and his face took
on an expression of despair. “So that’s the end of it! Now you, sir,
will you answer me or not?” he went on suddenly, gazing at Gania with
ineffable malice. “Now then, you—”

He panted, and could hardly speak for agitation. He advanced into the
room mechanically; but perceiving Nina Alexandrovna and Varia he became
more or less embarrassed, in spite of his excitement. His followers
entered after him, and all paused a moment at sight of the ladies. Of
course their modesty was not fated to be long-lived, but for a moment
they were abashed. Once let them begin to shout, however, and nothing
on earth should disconcert them.

“What, you here too, prince?” said Rogojin, absently, but a little
surprised all the same “Still in your gaiters, eh?” He sighed, and
forgot the prince next moment, and his wild eyes wandered over to
Nastasia again, as though attracted in that direction by some magnetic
force.

Nastasia looked at the new arrivals with great curiosity. Gania
recollected himself at last.

“Excuse me, sirs,” he said, loudly, “but what does all this mean?” He
glared at the advancing crowd generally, but addressed his remarks
especially to their captain, Rogojin. “You are not in a stable,
gentlemen, though you may think it—my mother and sister are present.”

“Yes, I see your mother and sister,” muttered Rogojin, through his
teeth; and Lebedeff seemed to feel himself called upon to second the
statement.

“At all events, I must request you to step into the salon,” said Gania,
his rage rising quite out of proportion to his words, “and then I shall
inquire—”

“What, he doesn’t know me!” said Rogojin, showing his teeth
disagreeably. “He doesn’t recognize Rogojin!” He did not move an inch,
however.

“I have met you somewhere, I believe, but—”

“Met me somewhere, pfu! Why, it’s only three months since I lost two
hundred roubles of my father’s money to you, at cards. The old fellow
died before he found out. Ptitsin knows all about it. Why, I’ve only to
pull out a three-rouble note and show it to you, and you’d crawl on
your hands and knees to the other end of the town for it; that’s the
sort of man you are. Why, I’ve come now, at this moment, to buy you up!
Oh, you needn’t think that because I wear these boots I have no money.
I have lots of money, my beauty,—enough to buy up you and all yours
together. So I shall, if I like to! I’ll buy you up! I will!” he
yelled, apparently growing more and more intoxicated and excited. “Oh,
Nastasia Philipovna! don’t turn me out! Say one word, do! Are you going
to marry this man, or not?”

Rogojin asked his question like a lost soul appealing to some divinity,
with the reckless daring of one appointed to die, who has nothing to
lose.

He awaited the reply in deadly anxiety.

Nastasia Philipovna gazed at him with a haughty, ironical expression of
face; but when she glanced at Nina Alexandrovna and Varia, and from
them to Gania, she changed her tone, all of a sudden.

“Certainly not; what are you thinking of? What could have induced you
to ask such a question?” she replied, quietly and seriously, and even,
apparently, with some astonishment.

“No? No?” shouted Rogojin, almost out of his mind with joy. “You are
not going to, after all? And they told me—oh, Nastasia Philipovna—they
said you had promised to marry him, _him!_ As if you _could_ do
it!—him—pooh! I don’t mind saying it to everyone—I’d buy him off for a
hundred roubles, any day pfu! Give him a thousand, or three if he
likes, poor devil, and he’d cut and run the day before his wedding, and
leave his bride to me! Wouldn’t you, Gania, you blackguard? You’d take
three thousand, wouldn’t you? Here’s the money! Look, I’ve come on
purpose to pay you off and get your receipt, formally. I said I’d buy
you up, and so I will.”

“Get out of this, you drunken beast!” cried Gania, who was red and
white by turns.

Rogojin’s troop, who were only waiting for an excuse, set up a howl at
this. Lebedeff stepped forward and whispered something in Parfen’s ear.

“You’re right, clerk,” said the latter, “you’re right, tipsy
spirit—you’re right!—Nastasia Philipovna,” he added, looking at her
like some lunatic, harmless generally, but suddenly wound up to a pitch
of audacity, “here are eighteen thousand roubles, and—and you shall
have more—.” Here he threw a packet of bank-notes tied up in white
paper, on the table before her, not daring to say all he wished to say.

“No—no—no!” muttered Lebedeff, clutching at his arm. He was clearly
aghast at the largeness of the sum, and thought a far smaller amount
should have been tried first.

“No, you fool—you don’t know whom you are dealing with—and it appears I
am a fool, too!” said Parfen, trembling beneath the flashing glance of
Nastasia. “Oh, curse it all! What a fool I was to listen to you!” he
added, with profound melancholy.

Nastasia Philipovna, observing his woe-begone expression, suddenly
burst out laughing.

“Eighteen thousand roubles, for me? Why, you declare yourself a fool at
once,” she said, with impudent familiarity, as she rose from the sofa
and prepared to go. Gania watched the whole scene with a sinking of the
heart.

“Forty thousand, then—forty thousand roubles instead of eighteen!
Ptitsin and another have promised to find me forty thousand roubles by
seven o’clock tonight. Forty thousand roubles—paid down on the nail!”

The scene was growing more and more disgraceful; but Nastasia
Philipovna continued to laugh and did not go away. Nina Alexandrovna
and Varia had both risen from their places and were waiting, in silent
horror, to see what would happen. Varia’s eyes were all ablaze with
anger; but the scene had a different effect on Nina Alexandrovna. She
paled and trembled, and looked more and more like fainting every
moment.

“Very well then, a _hundred_ thousand! a hundred thousand! paid this
very day. Ptitsin! find it for me. A good share shall stick to your
fingers—come!”

“You are mad!” said Ptitsin, coming up quickly and seizing him by the
hand. “You’re drunk—the police will be sent for if you don’t look out.
Think where you are.”

“Yes, he’s boasting like a drunkard,” added Nastasia, as though with
the sole intention of goading him.

“I do _not_ boast! You shall have a hundred thousand, this very day.
Ptitsin, get the money, you gay usurer! Take what you like for it, but
get it by the evening! I’ll show that I’m in earnest!” cried Rogojin,
working himself up into a frenzy of excitement.

“Come, come; what’s all this?” cried General Ivolgin, suddenly and
angrily, coming close up to Rogojin. The unexpectedness of this sally
on the part of the hitherto silent old man caused some laughter among
the intruders.

“Halloa! what’s this now?” laughed Rogojin. “You come along with me,
old fellow! You shall have as much to drink as you like.”

“Oh, it’s too horrible!” cried poor Colia, sobbing with shame and
annoyance.

“Surely there must be someone among all of you here who will turn this
shameless creature out of the room?” cried Varia, suddenly. She was
shaking and trembling with rage.

“That’s me, I suppose. I’m the shameless creature!” cried Nastasia
Philipovna, with amused indifference. “Dear me, and I came—like a fool,
as I am—to invite them over to my house for the evening! Look how your
sister treats me, Gavrila Ardalionovitch.”

For some moments Gania stood as if stunned or struck by lightning,
after his sister’s speech. But seeing that Nastasia Philipovna was
really about to leave the room this time, he sprang at Varia and seized
her by the arm like a madman.

“What have you done?” he hissed, glaring at her as though he would like
to annihilate her on the spot. He was quite beside himself, and could
hardly articulate his words for rage.

“What have I done? Where are you dragging me to?”

“Do you wish me to beg pardon of this creature because she has come
here to insult our mother and disgrace the whole household, you low,
base wretch?” cried Varia, looking back at her brother with proud
defiance.

A few moments passed as they stood there face to face, Gania still
holding her wrist tightly. Varia struggled once—twice—to get free; then
could restrain herself no longer, and spat in his face.

“There’s a girl for you!” cried Nastasia Philipovna. “Mr. Ptitsin, I
congratulate you on your choice.”

Gania lost his head. Forgetful of everything he aimed a blow at Varia,
which would inevitably have laid her low, but suddenly another hand
caught his. Between him and Varia stood the prince.

“Enough—enough!” said the latter, with insistence, but all of a tremble
with excitement.

“Are you going to cross my path for ever, damn you!” cried Gania; and,
loosening his hold on Varia, he slapped the prince’s face with all his
force.

Exclamations of horror arose on all sides. The prince grew pale as
death; he gazed into Gania’s eyes with a strange, wild, reproachful
look; his lips trembled and vainly endeavoured to form some words; then
his mouth twisted into an incongruous smile.

“Very well—never mind about me; but I shall not allow you to strike
her!” he said, at last, quietly. Then, suddenly, he could bear it no
longer, and covering his face with his hands, turned to the wall, and
murmured in broken accents:

“Oh! how ashamed you will be of this afterwards!”

Gania certainly did look dreadfully abashed. Colia rushed up to comfort
the prince, and after him crowded Varia, Rogojin and all, even the
general.

“It’s nothing, it’s nothing!” said the prince, and again he wore the
smile which was so inconsistent with the circumstances.

“Yes, he will be ashamed!” cried Rogojin. “You will be properly ashamed
of yourself for having injured such a—such a sheep” (he could not find
a better word). “Prince, my dear fellow, leave this and come away with
me. I’ll show you how Rogojin shows his affection for his friends.”

Nastasia Philipovna was also much impressed, both with Gania’s action
and with the prince’s reply.

Her usually thoughtful, pale face, which all this while had been so
little in harmony with the jests and laughter which she had seemed to
put on for the occasion, was now evidently agitated by new feelings,
though she tried to conceal the fact and to look as though she were as
ready as ever for jesting and irony.

“I really think I must have seen him somewhere!” she murmured seriously
enough.

“Oh, aren’t you ashamed of yourself—aren’t you ashamed? Are you really
the sort of woman you are trying to represent yourself to be? Is it
possible?” The prince was now addressing Nastasia, in a tone of
reproach, which evidently came from his very heart.

Nastasia Philipovna looked surprised, and smiled, but evidently
concealed something beneath her smile and with some confusion and a
glance at Gania she left the room.

However, she had not reached the outer hall when she turned round,
walked quickly up to Nina Alexandrovna, seized her hand and lifted it
to her lips.

“He guessed quite right. I am not that sort of woman,” she whispered
hurriedly, flushing red all over. Then she turned again and left the
room so quickly that no one could imagine what she had come back for.
All they saw was that she said something to Nina Alexandrovna in a
hurried whisper, and seemed to kiss her hand. Varia, however, both saw
and heard all, and watched Nastasia out of the room with an expression
of wonder.

Gania recollected himself in time to rush after her in order to show
her out, but she had gone. He followed her to the stairs.

“Don’t come with me,” she cried, “_Au revoir_, till the evening—do you
hear? _Au revoir!_”

He returned thoughtful and confused; the riddle lay heavier than ever
on his soul. He was troubled about the prince, too, and so bewildered
that he did not even observe Rogojin’s rowdy band crowd past him and
step on his toes, at the door as they went out. They were all talking
at once. Rogojin went ahead of the others, talking to Ptitsin, and
apparently insisting vehemently upon something very important.

“You’ve lost the game, Gania” he cried, as he passed the latter.

Gania gazed after him uneasily, but said nothing.

XI.

The prince now left the room and shut himself up in his own chamber.
Colia followed him almost at once, anxious to do what he could to
console him. The poor boy seemed to be already so attached to him that
he could hardly leave him.

“You were quite right to go away!” he said. “The row will rage there
worse than ever now; and it’s like this every day with us—and all
through that Nastasia Philipovna.”

“You have so many sources of trouble here, Colia,” said the prince.

“Yes, indeed, and it is all our own fault. But I have a great friend
who is much worse off even than we are. Would you like to know him?”

“Yes, very much. Is he one of your school-fellows?”

“Well, not exactly. I will tell you all about him some day.... What do
you think of Nastasia Philipovna? She is beautiful, isn’t she? I had
never seen her before, though I had a great wish to do so. She
fascinated me. I could forgive Gania if he were to marry her for love,
but for money! Oh dear! that is horrible!”

“Yes, your brother does not attract me much.”

“I am not surprised at that. After what you... But I do hate that way
of looking at things! Because some fool, or a rogue pretending to be a
fool, strikes a man, that man is to be dishonoured for his whole life,
unless he wipes out the disgrace with blood, or makes his assailant beg
forgiveness on his knees! I think that so very absurd and tyrannical.
Lermontoff’s Bal Masque is based on that idea—a stupid and unnatural
one, in my opinion; but he was hardly more than a child when he wrote
it.”

“I like your sister very much.”

“Did you see how she spat in Gania’s face! Varia is afraid of no one.
But you did not follow her example, and yet I am sure it was not
through cowardice. Here she comes! Speak of a wolf and you see his
tail! I felt sure that she would come. She is very generous, though of
course she has her faults.”

Varia pounced upon her brother.

“This is not the place for you,” said she. “Go to father. Is he
plaguing you, prince?”

“Not in the least; on the contrary, he interests me.”

“Scolding as usual, Varia! It is the worst thing about her. After all,
I believe father may have started off with Rogojin. No doubt he is
sorry now. Perhaps I had better go and see what he is doing,” added
Colia, running off.

“Thank God, I have got mother away, and put her to bed without another
scene! Gania is worried—and ashamed—not without reason! What a
spectacle! I have come to thank you once more, prince, and to ask you
if you knew Nastasia Philipovna before?”

“No, I have never known her.”

“Then what did you mean, when you said straight out to her that she was
not really ‘like that’? You guessed right, I fancy. It is quite
possible she was not herself at the moment, though I cannot fathom her
meaning. Evidently she meant to hurt and insult us. I have heard
curious tales about her before now, but if she came to invite us to her
house, why did she behave so to my mother? Ptitsin knows her very well;
he says he could not understand her today. With Rogojin, too! No one
with a spark of self-respect could have talked like that in the house
of her... Mother is extremely vexed on your account, too...

“That is nothing!” said the prince, waving his hand.

“But how meek she was when you spoke to her!”

“Meek! What do you mean?”

“You told her it was a shame for her to behave so, and her manner
changed at once; she was like another person. You have some influence
over her, prince,” added Varia, smiling a little.

The door opened at this point, and in came Gania most unexpectedly.

He was not in the least disconcerted to see Varia there, but he stood a
moment at the door, and then approached the prince quietly.

“Prince,” he said, with feeling, “I was a blackguard. Forgive me!” His
face gave evidence of suffering. The prince was considerably amazed,
and did not reply at once. “Oh, come, forgive me, forgive me!” Gania
insisted, rather impatiently. “If you like, I’ll kiss your hand.
There!”

The prince was touched; he took Gania’s hands, and embraced him
heartily, while each kissed the other.

“I never, never thought you were like that,” said Muishkin, drawing a
deep breath. “I thought you—you weren’t capable of—”

“Of what? Apologizing, eh? And where on earth did I get the idea that
you were an idiot? You always observe what other people pass by
unnoticed; one could talk sense to you, but—”

“Here is another to whom you should apologize,” said the prince,
pointing to Varia.

“No, no! they are all enemies! I’ve tried them often enough, believe
me,” and Gania turned his back on Varia with these words.

“But if I beg you to make it up?” said Varia.

“And you’ll go to Nastasia Philipovna’s this evening—”

“If you insist: but, judge for yourself, can I go, ought I to go?”

“But she is not that sort of woman, I tell you!” said Gania, angrily.
“She was only acting.”

“I know that—I know that; but what a part to play! And think what she
must take _you_ for, Gania! I know she kissed mother’s hand, and all
that, but she laughed at you, all the same. All this is not good enough
for seventy-five thousand roubles, my dear boy. You are capable of
honourable feelings still, and that’s why I am talking to you so. Oh!
_do_ take care what you are doing! Don’t you know yourself that it will
end badly, Gania?”

So saying, and in a state of violent agitation, Varia left the room.

“There, they are all like that,” said Gania, laughing, “just as if I do
not know all about it much better than they do.”

He sat down with these words, evidently intending to prolong his visit.

“If you know it so well,” said the prince a little timidly, “why do you
choose all this worry for the sake of the seventy-five thousand, which,
you confess, does not cover it?”

“I didn’t mean that,” said Gania; “but while we are upon the subject,
let me hear your opinion. Is all this worry worth seventy-five thousand
or not?”

“Certainly not.”

“Of course! And it would be a disgrace to marry so, eh?”

“A great disgrace.”

“Oh, well, then you may know that I shall certainly do it, now. I shall
certainly marry her. I was not quite sure of myself before, but now I
am. Don’t say a word: I know what you want to tell me—”

“No. I was only going to say that what surprises me most of all is your
extraordinary confidence.”

“How so? What in?”

“That Nastasia Philipovna will accept you, and that the question is as
good as settled; and secondly, that even if she did, you would be able
to pocket the money. Of course, I know very little about it, but that’s
my view. When a man marries for money it often happens that the wife
keeps the money in her own hands.”

“Of course, you don’t know all; but, I assure you, you needn’t be
afraid, it won’t be like that in our case. There are circumstances,”
said Gania, rather excitedly. “And as to her answer to me, there’s no
doubt about that. Why should you suppose she will refuse me?”

“Oh, I only judge by what I see. Varvara Ardalionovna said just now—”

“Oh she—they don’t know anything about it! Nastasia was only chaffing
Rogojin. I was alarmed at first, but I have thought better of it now;
she was simply laughing at him. She looks on me as a fool because I
show that I meant her money, and doesn’t realize that there are other
men who would deceive her in far worse fashion. I’m not going to
pretend anything, and you’ll see she’ll marry me, all right. If she
likes to live quietly, so she shall; but if she gives me any of her
nonsense, I shall leave her at once, but I shall keep the money. I’m
not going to look a fool; that’s the first thing, not to look a fool.”

“But Nastasia Philipovna seems to me to be such a _sensible_ woman,
and, as such, why should she run blindly into this business? That’s
what puzzles me so,” said the prince.

“You don’t know all, you see; I tell you there are things—and besides,
I’m sure that she is persuaded that I love her to distraction, and I
give you my word I have a strong suspicion that she loves me, too—in
her own way, of course. She thinks she will be able to make a sort of
slave of me all my life; but I shall prepare a little surprise for her.
I don’t know whether I ought to be confidential with you, prince; but,
I assure you, you are the only decent fellow I have come across. I have
not spoken so sincerely as I am doing at this moment for years. There
are uncommonly few honest people about, prince; there isn’t one
honester than Ptitsin, he’s the best of the lot. Are you laughing? You
don’t know, perhaps, that blackguards like honest people, and being one
myself I like you. _Why_ am I a blackguard? Tell me honestly, now. They
all call me a blackguard because of her, and I have got into the way of
thinking myself one. That’s what is so bad about the business.”

“_I_ for one shall never think you a blackguard again,” said the
prince. “I confess I had a poor opinion of you at first, but I have
been so joyfully surprised about you just now; it’s a good lesson for
me. I shall never judge again without a thorough trial. I see now that
you are not only not a blackguard, but are not even quite spoiled. I
see that you are quite an ordinary man, not original in the least
degree, but rather weak.”

Gania laughed sarcastically, but said nothing. The prince, seeing that
he did not quite like the last remark, blushed, and was silent too.

“Has my father asked you for money?” asked Gania, suddenly.

“No.”

“Don’t give it to him if he does. Fancy, he was a decent, respectable
man once! He was received in the best society; he was not always the
liar he is now. Of course, wine is at the bottom of it all; but he is a
good deal worse than an innocent liar now. Do you know that he keeps a
mistress? I can’t understand how mother is so long-suffering. Did he
tell you the story of the siege of Kars? Or perhaps the one about his
grey horse that talked? He loves to enlarge on these absurd histories.”
And Gania burst into a fit of laughter. Suddenly he turned to the
prince and asked: “Why are you looking at me like that?”

“I am surprised to see you laugh in that way, like a child. You came to
make friends with me again just now, and you said, ‘I will kiss your
hand, if you like,’ just as a child would have said it. And then, all
at once you are talking of this mad project—of these seventy-five
thousand roubles! It all seems so absurd and impossible.”

“Well, what conclusion have you reached?”

“That you are rushing madly into the undertaking, and that you would do
well to think it over again. It is more than possible that Varvara
Ardalionovna is right.”

“Ah! now you begin to moralize! I know that I am only a child, very
well,” replied Gania impatiently. “That is proved by my having this
conversation with you. It is not for money only, prince, that I am
rushing into this affair,” he continued, hardly master of his words, so
closely had his vanity been touched. “If I reckoned on that I should
certainly be deceived, for I am still too weak in mind and character. I
am obeying a passion, an impulse perhaps, because I have but one aim,
one that overmasters all else. You imagine that once I am in possession
of these seventy-five thousand roubles, I shall rush to buy a
carriage... No, I shall go on wearing the old overcoat I have worn for
three years, and I shall give up my club. I shall follow the example of
men who have made their fortunes. When Ptitsin was seventeen he slept
in the street, he sold pen-knives, and began with a copeck; now he has
sixty thousand roubles, but to get them, what has he not done? Well, I
shall be spared such a hard beginning, and shall start with a little
capital. In fifteen years people will say, ‘Look, that’s Ivolgin, the
king of the Jews!’ You say that I have no originality. Now mark this,
prince—there is nothing so offensive to a man of our time and race than
to be told that he is wanting in originality, that he is weak in
character, has no particular talent, and is, in short, an ordinary
person. You have not even done me the honour of looking upon me as a
rogue. Do you know, I could have knocked you down for that just now!
You wounded me more cruelly than Epanchin, who thinks me capable of
selling him my wife! Observe, it was a perfectly gratuitous idea on his
part, seeing there has never been any discussion of it between us! This
has exasperated me, and I am determined to make a fortune! I will do
it! Once I am rich, I shall be a genius, an extremely original man. One
of the vilest and most hateful things connected with money is that it
can buy even talent; and will do so as long as the world lasts. You
will say that this is childish—or romantic. Well, that will be all the
better for me, but the thing shall be done. I will carry it through. He
laughs most, who laughs last. Why does Epanchin insult me? Simply
because, socially, I am a nobody. However, enough for the present.
Colia has put his nose in to tell us dinner is ready, twice. I’m dining
out. I shall come and talk to you now and then; you shall be
comfortable enough with us. They are sure to make you one of the
family. I think you and I will either be great friends or enemies. Look
here now, supposing I had kissed your hand just now, as I offered to do
in all sincerity, should I have hated you for it afterwards?”

“Certainly, but not always. You would not have been able to keep it up,
and would have ended by forgiving me,” said the prince, after a pause
for reflection, and with a pleasant smile.

“Oho, how careful one has to be with you, prince! Haven’t you put a
drop of poison in that remark now, eh? By the way—ha, ha, ha!—I forgot
to ask, was I right in believing that you were a good deal struck
yourself with Nastasia Philipovna.”

“Ye-yes.”

“Are you in love with her?”

“N-no.”

“And yet you flush up as red as a rosebud! Come—it’s all right. I’m not
going to laugh at you. Do you know she is a very virtuous woman?
Believe it or not, as you like. You think she and Totski—not a bit of
it, not a bit of it! Not for ever so long! _Au revoir!_”

Gania left the room in great good humour. The prince stayed behind, and
meditated alone for a few minutes. At length, Colia popped his head in
once more.

“I don’t want any dinner, thanks, Colia. I had too good a lunch at
General Epanchin’s.”

Colia came into the room and gave the prince a note; it was from the
general and was carefully sealed up. It was clear from Colia’s face how
painful it was to him to deliver the missive. The prince read it, rose,
and took his hat.

“It’s only a couple of yards,” said Colia, blushing.

“He’s sitting there over his bottle—and how they can give him credit, I
cannot understand. Don’t tell mother I brought you the note, prince; I
have sworn not to do it a thousand times, but I’m always so sorry for
him. Don’t stand on ceremony, give him some trifle, and let that end
it.”

“Come along, Colia, I want to see your father. I have an idea,” said
the prince.

XII.

Colia took the prince to a public-house in the Litaynaya, not far off.
In one of the side rooms there sat at a table—looking like one of the
regular guests of the establishment—Ardalion Alexandrovitch, with a
bottle before him, and a newspaper on his knee. He was waiting for the
prince, and no sooner did the latter appear than he began a long
harangue about something or other; but so far gone was he that the
prince could hardly understand a word.

“I have not got a ten-rouble note,” said the prince; “but here is a
twenty-five. Change it and give me back the fifteen, or I shall be left
without a farthing myself.”

“Oh, of course, of course; and you quite understand that I—”

“Yes; and I have another request to make, general. Have you ever been
at Nastasia Philipovna’s?”

“I? I? Do you mean me? Often, my friend, often! I only pretended I had
not in order to avoid a painful subject. You saw today, you were a
witness, that I did all that a kind, an indulgent father could do. Now
a father of altogether another type shall step into the scene. You
shall see; the old soldier shall lay bare this intrigue, or a shameless
woman will force her way into a respectable and noble family.”

“Yes, quite so. I wished to ask you whether you could show me the way
to Nastasia Philipovna’s tonight. I must go; I have business with her;
I was not invited but I was introduced. Anyhow I am ready to trespass
the laws of propriety if only I can get in somehow or other.”

“My dear young friend, you have hit on my very idea. It was not for
this rubbish I asked you to come over here” (he pocketed the money,
however, at this point), “it was to invite your alliance in the
campaign against Nastasia Philipovna tonight. How well it sounds,
‘General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin.’ That’ll fetch her, I think, eh?
Capital! We’ll go at nine; there’s time yet.”

“Where does she live?”

“Oh, a long way off, near the Great Theatre, just in the square
there—It won’t be a large party.”

The general sat on and on. He had ordered a fresh bottle when the
prince arrived; this took him an hour to drink, and then he had
another, and another, during the consumption of which he told pretty
nearly the whole story of his life. The prince was in despair. He felt
that though he had but applied to this miserable old drunkard because
he saw no other way of getting to Nastasia Philipovna’s, yet he had
been very wrong to put the slightest confidence in such a man.

At last he rose and declared that he would wait no longer. The general
rose too, drank the last drops that he could squeeze out of the bottle,
and staggered into the street.

Muishkin began to despair. He could not imagine how he had been so
foolish as to trust this man. He only wanted one thing, and that was to
get to Nastasia Philipovna’s, even at the cost of a certain amount of
impropriety. But now the scandal threatened to be more than he had
bargained for. By this time Ardalion Alexandrovitch was quite
intoxicated, and he kept his companion listening while he discoursed
eloquently and pathetically on subjects of all kinds, interspersed with
torrents of recrimination against the members of his family. He
insisted that all his troubles were caused by their bad conduct, and
time alone would put an end to them.

At last they reached the Litaynaya. The thaw increased steadily, a
warm, unhealthy wind blew through the streets, vehicles splashed
through the mud, and the iron shoes of horses and mules rang on the
paving stones. Crowds of melancholy people plodded wearily along the
footpaths, with here and there a drunken man among them.

“Do you see those brightly-lighted windows?” said the general. “Many of
my old comrades-in-arms live about here, and I, who served longer, and
suffered more than any of them, am walking on foot to the house of a
woman of rather questionable reputation! A man, look you, who has
thirteen bullets on his breast!... You don’t believe it? Well, I can
assure you it was entirely on my account that Pirogoff telegraphed to
Paris, and left Sebastopol at the greatest risk during the siege.
Nelaton, the Tuileries surgeon, demanded a safe conduct, in the name of
science, into the besieged city in order to attend my wounds. The
government knows all about it. ‘That’s the Ivolgin with thirteen
bullets in him!’ That’s how they speak of me.... Do you see that house,
prince? One of my old friends lives on the first floor, with his large
family. In this and five other houses, three overlooking Nevsky, two in
the Morskaya, are all that remain of my personal friends. Nina
Alexandrovna gave them up long ago, but I keep in touch with them
still... I may say I find refreshment in this little coterie, in thus
meeting my old acquaintances and subordinates, who worship me still, in
spite of all. General Sokolovitch (by the way, I have not called on him
lately, or seen Anna Fedorovna)... You know, my dear prince, when a
person does not receive company himself, he gives up going to other
people’s houses involuntarily. And yet... well... you look as if you
didn’t believe me.... Well now, why should I not present the son of my
old friend and companion to this delightful family—General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin? You will see a lovely girl—what am I saying—a lovely
girl? No, indeed, two, three! Ornaments of this city and of society:
beauty, education, culture—the woman question—poetry—everything! Added
to which is the fact that each one will have a dot of at least eighty
thousand roubles. No bad thing, eh?... In a word I absolutely must
introduce you to them: it is a duty, an obligation. General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin. Tableau!”

“At once? Now? You must have forgotten...” began the prince.

“No, I have forgotten nothing. Come! This is the house—up this
magnificent staircase. I am surprised not to see the porter, but ....
it is a holiday... and the man has gone off... Drunken fool! Why have
they not got rid of him? Sokolovitch owes all the happiness he has had
in the service and in his private life to me, and me alone, but... here
we are.”

The prince followed quietly, making no further objection for fear of
irritating the old man. At the same time he fervently hoped that
General Sokolovitch and his family would fade away like a mirage in the
desert, so that the visitors could escape, by merely returning
downstairs. But to his horror he saw that General Ivolgin was quite
familiar with the house, and really seemed to have friends there. At
every step he named some topographical or biographical detail that left
nothing to be desired on the score of accuracy. When they arrived at
last, on the first floor, and the general turned to ring the bell to
the right, the prince decided to run away, but a curious incident
stopped him momentarily.

“You have made a mistake, general,” said he. “The name on the door is
Koulakoff, and you were going to see General Sokolovitch.”

“Koulakoff... Koulakoff means nothing. This is Sokolovitch’s flat, and
I am ringing at his door.... What do I care for Koulakoff?... Here
comes someone to open.”

In fact, the door opened directly, and the footman informed the
visitors that the family were all away.

“What a pity! What a pity! It’s just my luck!” repeated Ardalion
Alexandrovitch over and over again, in regretful tones. “When your
master and mistress return, my man, tell them that General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin desired to present themselves, and that they were
extremely sorry, excessively grieved...”

Just then another person belonging to the household was seen at the
back of the hall. It was a woman of some forty years, dressed in sombre
colours, probably a housekeeper or a governess. Hearing the names she
came forward with a look of suspicion on her face.

“Marie Alexandrovna is not at home,” said she, staring hard at the
general. “She has gone to her mother’s, with Alexandra Michailovna.”

“Alexandra Michailovna out, too! How disappointing! Would you believe
it, I am always so unfortunate! May I most respectfully ask you to
present my compliments to Alexandra Michailovna, and remind her... tell
her, that with my whole heart I wish for her what she wished for
herself on Thursday evening, while she was listening to Chopin’s
Ballade. She will remember. I wish it with all sincerity. General
Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin!”

The woman’s face changed; she lost her suspicious expression.

“I will not fail to deliver your message,” she replied, and bowed them
out.

As they went downstairs the general regretted repeatedly that he had
failed to introduce the prince to his friends.

“You know I am a bit of a poet,” said he. “Have you noticed it? The
poetic soul, you know.” Then he added suddenly—“But after all... after
all I believe we made a mistake this time! I remember that the
Sokolovitch’s live in another house, and what is more, they are just
now in Moscow. Yes, I certainly was at fault. However, it is of no
consequence.”

“Just tell me,” said the prince in reply, “may I count still on your
assistance? Or shall I go on alone to see Nastasia Philipovna?”

“Count on my assistance? Go alone? How can you ask me that question,
when it is a matter on which the fate of my family so largely depends?
You don’t know Ivolgin, my friend. To trust Ivolgin is to trust a rock;
that’s how the first squadron I commanded spoke of me. ‘Depend upon
Ivolgin,’ said they all, ‘he is as steady as a rock.’ But, excuse me, I
must just call at a house on our way, a house where I have found
consolation and help in all my trials for years.”

“You are going home?”

“No... I wish... to visit Madame Terentieff, the widow of Captain
Terentieff, my old subordinate and friend. She helps me to keep up my
courage, and to bear the trials of my domestic life, and as I have an
extra burden on my mind today...”

“It seems to me,” interrupted the prince, “that I was foolish to
trouble you just now. However, at present you... Good-bye!”

“Indeed, you must not go away like that, young man, you must not!”
cried the general. “My friend here is a widow, the mother of a family;
her words come straight from her heart, and find an echo in mine. A
visit to her is merely an affair of a few minutes; I am quite at home
in her house. I will have a wash, and dress, and then we can drive to
the Grand Theatre. Make up your mind to spend the evening with me....
We are just there—that’s the house... Why, Colia! you here! Well, is
Marfa Borisovna at home or have you only just come?”

“Oh no! I have been here a long while,” replied Colia, who was at the
front door when the general met him. “I am keeping Hippolyte company.
He is worse, and has been in bed all day. I came down to buy some
cards. Marfa Borisovna expects you. But what a state you are in,
father!” added the boy, noticing his father’s unsteady gait. “Well, let
us go in.”

On meeting Colia the prince determined to accompany the general, though
he made up his mind to stay as short a time as possible. He wanted
Colia, but firmly resolved to leave the general behind. He could not
forgive himself for being so simple as to imagine that Ivolgin would be
of any use. The three climbed up the long staircase until they reached
the fourth floor where Madame Terentieff lived.

“You intend to introduce the prince?” asked Colia, as they went up.

“Yes, my boy. I wish to present him: General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin! But what’s the matter?... what?... How is Marfa Borisovna?”

“You know, father, you would have done much better not to come at all!
She is ready to eat you up! You have not shown yourself since the day
before yesterday and she is expecting the money. Why did you promise
her any? You are always the same! Well, now you will have to get out of
it as best you can.”

They stopped before a somewhat low doorway on the fourth floor.
Ardalion Alexandrovitch, evidently much out of countenance, pushed
Muishkin in front.

“I will wait here,” he stammered. “I should like to surprise her. ....”

Colia entered first, and as the door stood open, the mistress of the
house peeped out. The surprise of the general’s imagination fell very
flat, for she at once began to address him in terms of reproach.

Marfa Borisovna was about forty years of age. She wore a
dressing-jacket, her feet were in slippers, her face painted, and her
hair was in dozens of small plaits. No sooner did she catch sight of
Ardalion Alexandrovitch than she screamed:

“There he is, that wicked, mean wretch! I knew it was he! My heart
misgave me!”

The old man tried to put a good face on the affair.

“Come, let us go in—it’s all right,” he whispered in the prince’s ear.

But it was more serious than he wished to think. As soon as the
visitors had crossed the low dark hall, and entered the narrow
reception-room, furnished with half a dozen cane chairs, and two small
card-tables, Madame Terentieff, in the shrill tones habitual to her,
continued her stream of invectives.

“Are you not ashamed? Are you not ashamed? You barbarian! You tyrant!
You have robbed me of all I possessed—you have sucked my bones to the
marrow. How long shall I be your victim? Shameless, dishonourable man!”

“Marfa Borisovna! Marfa Borisovna! Here is... the Prince Muishkin!
General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin,” stammered the disconcerted old
man.

“Would you believe,” said the mistress of the house, suddenly
addressing the prince, “would you believe that that man has not even
spared my orphan children? He has stolen everything I possessed, sold
everything, pawned everything; he has left me nothing—nothing! What am
I to do with your IOU’s, you cunning, unscrupulous rogue? Answer,
devourer! answer, heart of stone! How shall I feed my orphans? with
what shall I nourish them? And now he has come, he is drunk! He can
scarcely stand. How, oh how, have I offended the Almighty, that He
should bring this curse upon me! Answer, you worthless villain,
answer!”

But this was too much for the general.

“Here are twenty-five roubles, Marfa Borisovna... it is all that I can
give... and I owe even these to the prince’s generosity—my noble
friend. I have been cruelly deceived. Such is... life... Now... Excuse
me, I am very weak,” he continued, standing in the centre of the room,
and bowing to all sides. “I am faint; excuse me! Lenotchka... a
cushion... my dear!”

Lenotchka, a little girl of eight, ran to fetch the cushion at once,
and placed it on the rickety old sofa. The general meant to have said
much more, but as soon as he had stretched himself out, he turned his
face to the wall, and slept the sleep of the just.

With a grave and ceremonious air, Marfa Borisovna motioned the prince
to a chair at one of the card-tables. She seated herself opposite,
leaned her right cheek on her hand, and sat in silence, her eyes fixed
on Muishkin, now and again sighing deeply. The three children, two
little girls and a boy, Lenotchka being the eldest, came and leant on
the table and also stared steadily at him. Presently Colia appeared
from the adjoining room.

“I am very glad indeed to have met you here, Colia,” said the prince.
“Can you do something for me? I must see Nastasia Philipovna, and I
asked Ardalion Alexandrovitch just now to take me to her house, but he
has gone to sleep, as you see. Will you show me the way, for I do not
know the street? I have the address, though; it is close to the Grand
Theatre.”

“Nastasia Philipovna? She does not live there, and to tell you the
truth my father has never been to her house! It is strange that you
should have depended on him! She lives near Wladimir Street, at the
Five Corners, and it is quite close by. Will you go directly? It is
just half-past nine. I will show you the way with pleasure.”

Colia and the prince went off together. Alas! the latter had no money
to pay for a cab, so they were obliged to walk.

“I should have liked to have taken you to see Hippolyte,” said Colia.
“He is the eldest son of the lady you met just now, and was in the next
room. He is ill, and has been in bed all day. But he is rather strange,
and extremely sensitive, and I thought he might be upset considering
the circumstances in which you came... Somehow it touches me less, as
it concerns my father, while it is _his_ mother. That, of course, makes
a great difference. What is a terrible disgrace to a woman, does not
disgrace a man, at least not in the same way. Perhaps public opinion is
wrong in condemning one sex, and excusing the other. Hippolyte is an
extremely clever boy, but so prejudiced. He is really a slave to his
opinions.”

“Do you say he is consumptive?”

“Yes. It really would be happier for him to die young. If I were in his
place I should certainly long for death. He is unhappy about his
brother and sisters, the children you saw. If it were possible, if we
only had a little money, we should leave our respective families, and
live together in a little apartment of our own. It is our dream. But,
do you know, when I was talking over your affair with him, he was
angry, and said that anyone who did not call out a man who had given
him a blow was a coward. He is very irritable to-day, and I left off
arguing the matter with him. So Nastasia Philipovna has invited you to
go and see her?”

“To tell the truth, she has not.”

“Then how do you come to be going there?” cried Colia, so much
astonished that he stopped short in the middle of the pavement. “And...
and are you going to her ‘At Home’ in that costume?”

“I don’t know, really, whether I shall be allowed in at all. If she
will receive me, so much the better. If not, the matter is ended. As to
my clothes—what can I do?”

“Are you going there for some particular reason, or only as a way of
getting into her society, and that of her friends?”

“No, I have really an object in going... That is, I am going on
business it is difficult to explain, but...”

“Well, whether you go on business or not is your affair, I do not want
to know. The only important thing, in my eyes, is that you should not
be going there simply for the pleasure of spending your evening in such
company—cocottes, generals, usurers! If that were the case I should
despise and laugh at you. There are terribly few honest people here,
and hardly any whom one can respect, although people put on airs—Varia
especially! Have you noticed, prince, how many adventurers there are
nowadays? Especially here, in our dear Russia. How it has happened I
never can understand. There used to be a certain amount of solidity in
all things, but now what happens? Everything is exposed to the public
gaze, veils are thrown back, every wound is probed by careless fingers.
We are for ever present at an orgy of scandalous revelations. Parents
blush when they remember their old-fashioned morality. At Moscow lately
a father was heard urging his son to stop at nothing—at nothing, mind
you!—to get money! The press seized upon the story, of course, and now
it is public property. Look at my father, the general! See what he is,
and yet, I assure you, he is an honest man! Only... he drinks too much,
and his morals are not all we could desire. Yes, that’s true! I pity
him, to tell the truth, but I dare not say so, because everybody would
laugh at me—but I do pity him! And who are the really clever men, after
all? Money-grubbers, every one of them, from the first to the last.
Hippolyte finds excuses for money-lending, and says it is a necessity.
He talks about the economic movement, and the ebb and flow of capital;
the devil knows what he means. It makes me angry to hear him talk so,
but he is soured by his troubles. Just imagine—the general keeps his
mother—but she lends him money! She lends it for a week or ten days at
very high interest! Isn’t it disgusting? And then, you would hardly
believe it, but my mother—Nina Alexandrovna—helps Hippolyte in all
sorts of ways, sends him money and clothes. She even goes as far as
helping the children, through Hippolyte, because their mother cares
nothing about them, and Varia does the same.”

“Well, just now you said there were no honest nor good people about,
that there were only money-grubbers—and here they are quite close at
hand, these honest and good people, your mother and Varia! I think
there is a good deal of moral strength in helping people in such
circumstances.”

“Varia does it from pride, and likes showing off, and giving herself
airs. As to my mother, I really do admire her—yes, and honour her.
Hippolyte, hardened as he is, feels it. He laughed at first, and
thought it vulgar of her—but now, he is sometimes quite touched and
overcome by her kindness. H’m! You call that being strong and good? I
will remember that! Gania knows nothing about it. He would say that it
was encouraging vice.”

“Ah, Gania knows nothing about it? It seems there are many things that
Gania does not know,” exclaimed the prince, as he considered Colia’s
last words.

“Do you know, I like you very much indeed, prince? I shall never forget
about this afternoon.”

“I like you too, Colia.”

“Listen to me! You are going to live here, are you not?” said Colia. “I
mean to get something to do directly, and earn money. Then shall we
three live together? You, and I, and Hippolyte? We will hire a flat,
and let the general come and visit us. What do you say?”

“It would be very pleasant,” returned the prince. “But we must see. I
am really rather worried just now. What! are we there already? Is that
the house? What a long flight of steps! And there’s a porter! Well,
Colia I don’t know what will come of it all.”

The prince seemed quite distracted for the moment.

“You must tell me all about it tomorrow! Don’t be afraid. I wish you
success; we agree so entirely that I can do so, although I do not
understand why you are here. Good-bye!” cried Colia excitedly. “Now I
will rush back and tell Hippolyte all about our plans and proposals!
But as to your getting in—don’t be in the least afraid. You will see
her. She is so original about everything. It’s the first floor. The
porter will show you.”

XIII.

The prince was very nervous as he reached the outer door; but he did
his best to encourage himself with the reflection that the worst thing
that could happen to him would be that he would not be received, or,
perhaps, received, then laughed at for coming.

But there was another question, which terrified him considerably, and
that was: what was he going to do when he _did_ get in? And to this
question he could fashion no satisfactory reply.

If only he could find an opportunity of coming close up to Nastasia
Philipovna and saying to her: “Don’t ruin yourself by marrying this
man. He does not love you, he only loves your money. He told me so
himself, and so did Aglaya Ivanovna, and I have come on purpose to warn
you”—but even that did not seem quite a legitimate or practicable thing
to do. Then, again, there was another delicate question, to which he
could not find an answer; dared not, in fact, think of it; but at the
very idea of which he trembled and blushed. However, in spite of all
his fears and heart-quakings he went in, and asked for Nastasia
Philipovna.

Nastasia occupied a medium-sized, but distinctly tasteful, flat,
beautifully furnished and arranged. At one period of these five years
of Petersburg life, Totski had certainly not spared his expenditure
upon her. He had calculated upon her eventual love, and tried to tempt
her with a lavish outlay upon comforts and luxuries, knowing too well
how easily the heart accustoms itself to comforts, and how difficult it
is to tear one’s self away from luxuries which have become habitual
and, little by little, indispensable.

Nastasia did not reject all this, she even loved her comforts and
luxuries, but, strangely enough, never became, in the least degree,
dependent upon them, and always gave the impression that she could do
just as well without them. In fact, she went so far as to inform Totski
on several occasions that such was the case, which the latter gentleman
considered a very unpleasant communication indeed.

But, of late, Totski had observed many strange and original features
and characteristics in Nastasia, which he had neither known nor
reckoned upon in former times, and some of these fascinated him, even
now, in spite of the fact that all his old calculations with regard to
her were long ago cast to the winds.

A maid opened the door for the prince (Nastasia’s servants were all
females) and, to his surprise, received his request to announce him to
her mistress without any astonishment. Neither his dirty boots, nor his
wide-brimmed hat, nor his sleeveless cloak, nor his evident confusion
of manner, produced the least impression upon her. She helped him off
with his cloak, and begged him to wait a moment in the ante-room while
she announced him.

The company assembled at Nastasia Philipovna’s consisted of none but
her most intimate friends, and formed a very small party in comparison
with her usual gatherings on this anniversary.

In the first place there were present Totski, and General Epanchin.
They were both highly amiable, but both appeared to be labouring under
a half-hidden feeling of anxiety as to the result of Nastasia’s
deliberations with regard to Gania, which result was to be made public
this evening.

Then, of course, there was Gania who was by no means so amiable as his
elders, but stood apart, gloomy, and miserable, and silent. He had
determined not to bring Varia with him; but Nastasia had not even asked
after her, though no sooner had he arrived than she had reminded him of
the episode between himself and the prince. The general, who had heard
nothing of it before, began to listen with some interest, while Gania,
drily, but with perfect candour, went through the whole history,
including the fact of his apology to the prince. He finished by
declaring that the prince was a most extraordinary man, and goodness
knows why he had been considered an idiot hitherto, for he was very far
from being one.

Nastasia listened to all this with great interest; but the conversation
soon turned to Rogojin and his visit, and this theme proved of the
greatest attraction to both Totski and the general.

Ptitsin was able to afford some particulars as to Rogojin’s conduct
since the afternoon. He declared that he had been busy finding money
for the latter ever since, and up to nine o’clock, Rogojin having
declared that he must absolutely have a hundred thousand roubles by the
evening. He added that Rogojin was drunk, of course; but that he
thought the money would be forthcoming, for the excited and intoxicated
rapture of the fellow impelled him to give any interest or premium that
was asked of him, and there were several others engaged in beating up
the money, also.

All this news was received by the company with somewhat gloomy
interest. Nastasia was silent, and would not say what she thought about
it. Gania was equally uncommunicative. The general seemed the most
anxious of all, and decidedly uneasy. The present of pearls which he
had prepared with so much joy in the morning had been accepted but
coldly, and Nastasia had smiled rather disagreeably as she took it from
him. Ferdishenko was the only person present in good spirits.

Totski himself, who had the reputation of being a capital talker, and
was usually the life and soul of these entertainments, was as silent as
any on this occasion, and sat in a state of, for him, most uncommon
perturbation.

The rest of the guests (an old tutor or schoolmaster, goodness knows
why invited; a young man, very timid, and shy and silent; a rather loud
woman of about forty, apparently an actress; and a very pretty,
well-dressed German lady who hardly said a word all the evening) not
only had no gift for enlivening the proceedings, but hardly knew what
to say for themselves when addressed. Under these circumstances the
arrival of the prince came almost as a godsend.

The announcement of his name gave rise to some surprise and to some
smiles, especially when it became evident, from Nastasia’s astonished
look, that she had not thought of inviting him. But her astonishment
once over, Nastasia showed such satisfaction that all prepared to greet
the prince with cordial smiles of welcome.

“Of course,” remarked General Epanchin, “he does this out of pure
innocence. It’s a little dangerous, perhaps, to encourage this sort of
freedom; but it is rather a good thing that he has arrived just at this
moment. He may enliven us a little with his originalities.”

“Especially as he asked himself,” said Ferdishenko.

“What’s that got to do with it?” asked the general, who loathed
Ferdishenko.

“Why, he must pay toll for his entrance,” explained the latter.

“H’m! Prince Muishkin is not Ferdishenko,” said the general,
impatiently. This worthy gentleman could never quite reconcile himself
to the idea of meeting Ferdishenko in society, and on an equal footing.

“Oh general, spare Ferdishenko!” replied the other, smiling. “I have
special privileges.”

“What do you mean by special privileges?”

“Once before I had the honour of stating them to the company. I will
repeat the explanation to-day for your excellency’s benefit. You see,
excellency, all the world is witty and clever except myself. I am
neither. As a kind of compensation I am allowed to tell the truth, for
it is a well-known fact that only stupid people tell ‘the truth.’ Added
to this, I am a spiteful man, just because I am not clever. If I am
offended or injured I bear it quite patiently until the man injuring me
meets with some misfortune. Then I remember, and take my revenge. I
return the injury sevenfold, as Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin says. (Of
course he never does so himself.) Excellency, no doubt you recollect
Kryloff’s fable, ‘The Lion and the Ass’? Well now, that’s you and I.
That fable was written precisely for us.”

“You seem to be talking nonsense again, Ferdishenko,” growled the
general.

“What is the matter, excellency? I know how to keep my place. When I
said just now that we, you and I, were the lion and the ass of
Kryloff’s fable, of course it is understood that I take the role of the
ass. Your excellency is the lion of which the fable remarks:

‘A mighty lion, terror of the woods,
Was shorn of his great prowess by old age.’


And I, your excellency, am the ass.”

“I am of your opinion on that last point,” said Ivan Fedorovitch, with
ill-concealed irritation.

All this was no doubt extremely coarse, and moreover it was
premeditated, but after all Ferdishenko had persuaded everyone to
accept him as a buffoon.

“If I am admitted and tolerated here,” he had said one day, “it is
simply because I talk in this way. How can anyone possibly receive such
a man as I am? I quite understand. Now, could I, a Ferdishenko, be
allowed to sit shoulder to shoulder with a clever man like Afanasy
Ivanovitch? There is one explanation, only one. I am given the position
because it is so entirely inconceivable!”

But these vulgarities seemed to please Nastasia Philipovna, although
too often they were both rude and offensive. Those who wished to go to
her house were forced to put up with Ferdishenko. Possibly the latter
was not mistaken in imagining that he was received simply in order to
annoy Totski, who disliked him extremely. Gania also was often made the
butt of the jester’s sarcasms, who used this method of keeping in
Nastasia Philipovna’s good graces.

“The prince will begin by singing us a fashionable ditty,” remarked
Ferdishenko, and looked at the mistress of the house, to see what she
would say.

“I don’t think so, Ferdishenko; please be quiet,” answered Nastasia
Philipovna dryly.

“A-ah! if he is to be under special patronage, I withdraw my claws.”

But Nastasia Philipovna had now risen and advanced to meet the prince.

“I was so sorry to have forgotten to ask you to come, when I saw you,”
she said, “and I am delighted to be able to thank you personally now,
and to express my pleasure at your resolution.”

So saying she gazed into his eyes, longing to see whether she could
make any guess as to the explanation of his motive in coming to her
house. The prince would very likely have made some reply to her kind
words, but he was so dazzled by her appearance that he could not speak.

Nastasia noticed this with satisfaction. She was in full dress this
evening; and her appearance was certainly calculated to impress all
beholders. She took his hand and led him towards her other guests. But
just before they reached the drawing-room door, the prince stopped her,
and hurriedly and in great agitation whispered to her:

“You are altogether perfection; even your pallor and thinness are
perfect; one could not wish you otherwise. I did so wish to come and
see you. I—forgive me, please—”

“Don’t apologize,” said Nastasia, laughing; “you spoil the whole
originality of the thing. I think what they say about you must be true,
that you are so original.—So you think me perfection, do you?”

“Yes.”

“H’m! Well, you may be a good reader of riddles but you are wrong
_there_, at all events. I’ll remind you of this, tonight.”

Nastasia introduced the prince to her guests, to most of whom he was
already known.

Totski immediately made some amiable remark. All seemed to brighten up
at once, and the conversation became general. Nastasia made the prince
sit down next to herself.

“Dear me, there’s nothing so very curious about the prince dropping in,
after all,” remarked Ferdishenko.

“It’s quite a clear case,” said the hitherto silent Gania. “I have
watched the prince almost all day, ever since the moment when he first
saw Nastasia Philipovna’s portrait, at General Epanchin’s. I remember
thinking at the time what I am now pretty sure of; and what, I may say
in passing, the prince confessed to myself.”

Gania said all this perfectly seriously, and without the slightest
appearance of joking; indeed, he seemed strangely gloomy.

“I did not confess anything to you,” said the prince, blushing. “I only
answered your question.”

“Bravo! That’s frank, at any rate!” shouted Ferdishenko, and there was
general laughter.

“Oh prince, prince! I never should have thought it of you;” said
General Epanchin. “And I imagined you a philosopher! Oh, you silent
fellows!”

“Judging from the fact that the prince blushed at this innocent joke,
like a young girl, I should think that he must, as an honourable man,
harbour the noblest intentions,” said the old toothless schoolmaster,
most unexpectedly; he had not so much as opened his mouth before. This
remark provoked general mirth, and the old fellow himself laughed
loudest of the lot, but ended with a stupendous fit of coughing.

Nastasia Philipovna, who loved originality and drollery of all kinds,
was apparently very fond of this old man, and rang the bell for more
tea to stop his coughing. It was now half-past ten o’clock.

“Gentlemen, wouldn’t you like a little champagne now?” she asked. “I
have it all ready; it will cheer us up—do now—no ceremony!”

This invitation to drink, couched, as it was, in such informal terms,
came very strangely from Nastasia Philipovna. Her usual entertainments
were not quite like this; there was more style about them. However, the
wine was not refused; each guest took a glass excepting Gania, who
drank nothing.

It was extremely difficult to account for Nastasia’s strange condition
of mind, which became more evident each moment, and which none could
avoid noticing.

She took her glass, and vowed she would empty it three times that
evening. She was hysterical, and laughed aloud every other minute with
no apparent reason—the next moment relapsing into gloom and
thoughtfulness.

Some of her guests suspected that she must be ill; but concluded at
last that she was expecting something, for she continued to look at her
watch impatiently and unceasingly; she was most absent and strange.

“You seem to be a little feverish tonight,” said the actress.

“Yes; I feel quite ill. I have been obliged to put on this shawl—I feel
so cold,” replied Nastasia. She certainly had grown very pale, and
every now and then she tried to suppress a trembling in her limbs.

“Had we not better allow our hostess to retire?” asked Totski of the
general.

“Not at all, gentlemen, not at all! Your presence is absolutely
necessary to me tonight,” said Nastasia, significantly.

As most of those present were aware that this evening a certain very
important decision was to be taken, these words of Nastasia
Philipovna’s appeared to be fraught with much hidden interest. The
general and Totski exchanged looks; Gania fidgeted convulsively in his
chair.

“Let’s play at some game!” suggested the actress.

“I know a new and most delightful game, added Ferdishenko.

“What is it?” asked the actress.

“Well, when we tried it we were a party of people, like this, for
instance; and somebody proposed that each of us, without leaving his
place at the table, should relate something about himself. It had to be
something that he really and honestly considered the very worst action
he had ever committed in his life. But he was to be honest—that was the
chief point! He wasn’t to be allowed to lie.”

“What an extraordinary idea!” said the general.

“That’s the beauty of it, general!”

“It’s a funny notion,” said Totski, “and yet quite natural—it’s only a
new way of boasting.”

“Perhaps that is just what was so fascinating about it.”

“Why, it would be a game to cry over—not to laugh at!” said the
actress.

“Did it succeed?” asked Nastasia Philipovna. “Come, let’s try it, let’s
try it; we really are not quite so jolly as we might be—let’s try it!
We may like it; it’s original, at all events!”

“Yes,” said Ferdishenko; “it’s a good idea—come along—the men begin. Of
course no one need tell a story if he prefers to be disobliging. We
must draw lots! Throw your slips of paper, gentlemen, into this hat,
and the prince shall draw for turns. It’s a very simple game; all you
have to do is to tell the story of the worst action of your life. It’s
as simple as anything. I’ll prompt anyone who forgets the rules!”

No one liked the idea much. Some smiled, some frowned; some objected,
but faintly, not wishing to oppose Nastasia’s wishes; for this new idea
seemed to be rather well received by her. She was still in an excited,
hysterical state, laughing convulsively at nothing and everything. Her
eyes were blazing, and her cheeks showed two bright red spots against
the white. The melancholy appearance of some of her guests seemed to
add to her sarcastic humour, and perhaps the very cynicism and cruelty
of the game proposed by Ferdishenko pleased her. At all events she was
attracted by the idea, and gradually her guests came round to her side;
the thing was original, at least, and might turn out to be amusing.
“And supposing it’s something that one—one can’t speak about before
ladies?” asked the timid and silent young man.

“Why, then of course, you won’t say anything about it. As if there are
not plenty of sins to your score without the need of those!” said
Ferdishenko.

“But I really don’t know which of my actions is the worst,” said the
lively actress.

“Ladies are exempted if they like.”

“And how are you to know that one isn’t lying? And if one lies the
whole point of the game is lost,” said Gania.

“Oh, but think how delightful to hear how one’s friends lie! Besides
you needn’t be afraid, Gania; everybody knows what your worst action is
without the need of any lying on your part. Only think, gentlemen,”—and
Ferdishenko here grew quite enthusiastic, “only think with what eyes we
shall observe one another tomorrow, after our tales have been told!”

“But surely this is a joke, Nastasia Philipovna?” asked Totski. “You
don’t really mean us to play this game.”

“Whoever is afraid of wolves had better not go into the wood,” said
Nastasia, smiling.

“But, pardon me, Mr. Ferdishenko, is it possible to make a game out of
this kind of thing?” persisted Totski, growing more and more uneasy. “I
assure you it can’t be a success.”

“And why not? Why, the last time I simply told straight off about how I
stole three roubles.”

“Perhaps so; but it is hardly possible that you told it so that it
seemed like truth, or so that you were believed. And, as Gavrila
Ardalionovitch has said, the least suggestion of a falsehood takes all
point out of the game. It seems to me that sincerity, on the other
hand, is only possible if combined with a kind of bad taste that would
be utterly out of place here.”

“How subtle you are, Afanasy Ivanovitch! You astonish me,” cried
Ferdishenko. “You will remark, gentlemen, that in saying that I could
not recount the story of my theft so as to be believed, Afanasy
Ivanovitch has very ingeniously implied that I am not capable of
thieving—(it would have been bad taste to say so openly); and all the
time he is probably firmly convinced, in his own mind, that I am very
well capable of it! But now, gentlemen, to business! Put in your slips,
ladies and gentlemen—is yours in, Mr. Totski? So—then we are all ready;
now prince, draw, please.” The prince silently put his hand into the
hat, and drew the names. Ferdishenko was first, then Ptitsin, then the
general, Totski next, his own fifth, then Gania, and so on; the ladies
did not draw.

“Oh, dear! oh, dear!” cried Ferdishenko. “I did so hope the prince
would come out first, and then the general. Well, gentlemen, I suppose
I must set a good example! What vexes me much is that I am such an
insignificant creature that it matters nothing to anybody whether I
have done bad actions or not! Besides, which am I to choose? It’s an
_embarras de richesse_. Shall I tell how I became a thief on one
occasion only, to convince Afanasy Ivanovitch that it is possible to
steal without being a thief?”

“Do go on, Ferdishenko, and don’t make unnecessary preface, or you’ll
never finish,” said Nastasia Philipovna. All observed how irritable and
cross she had become since her last burst of laughter; but none the
less obstinately did she stick to her absurd whim about this new game.
Totski sat looking miserable enough. The general lingered over his
champagne, and seemed to be thinking of some story for the time when
his turn should come.

XIV.

“I have no wit, Nastasia Philipovna,” began Ferdishenko, “and therefore
I talk too much, perhaps. Were I as witty, now, as Mr. Totski or the
general, I should probably have sat silent all the evening, as they
have. Now, prince, what do you think?—are there not far more thieves
than honest men in this world? Don’t you think we may say there does
not exist a single person so honest that he has never stolen anything
whatever in his life?”

“What a silly idea,” said the actress. “Of course it is not the case. I
have never stolen anything, for one.”

“H’m! very well, Daria Alexeyevna; you have not stolen anything—agreed.
But how about the prince, now—look how he is blushing!”

“I think you are partially right, but you exaggerate,” said the prince,
who had certainly blushed up, of a sudden, for some reason or other.

“Ferdishenko—either tell us your story, or be quiet, and mind your own
business. You exhaust all patience,” cuttingly and irritably remarked
Nastasia Philipovna.

“Immediately, immediately! As for my story, gentlemen, it is too stupid
and absurd to tell you.

“I assure you I am not a thief, and yet I have stolen; I cannot explain
why. It was at Semeon Ivanovitch Ishenka’s country house, one Sunday.
He had a dinner party. After dinner the men stayed at the table over
their wine. It struck me to ask the daughter of the house to play
something on the piano; so I passed through the corner room to join the
ladies. In that room, on Maria Ivanovna’s writing-table, I observed a
three-rouble note. She must have taken it out for some purpose, and
left it lying there. There was no one about. I took up the note and put
it in my pocket; why, I can’t say. I don’t know what possessed me to do
it, but it was done, and I went quickly back to the dining-room and
reseated myself at the dinner-table. I sat and waited there in a great
state of excitement. I talked hard, and told lots of stories, and
laughed like mad; then I joined the ladies.

“In half an hour or so the loss was discovered, and the servants were
being put under examination. Daria, the housemaid was suspected. I
exhibited the greatest interest and sympathy, and I remember that poor
Daria quite lost her head, and that I began assuring her, before
everyone, that I would guarantee her forgiveness on the part of her
mistress, if she would confess her guilt. They all stared at the girl,
and I remember a wonderful attraction in the reflection that here was I
sermonizing away, with the money in my own pocket all the while. I went
and spent the three roubles that very evening at a restaurant. I went
in and asked for a bottle of Lafite, and drank it up; I wanted to be
rid of the money.

“I did not feel much remorse either then or afterwards; but I would not
repeat the performance—believe it or not as you please. There—that’s
all.”

“Only, of course that’s not nearly your worst action,” said the
actress, with evident dislike in her face.

“That was a psychological phenomenon, not an action,” remarked Totski.

“And what about the maid?” asked Nastasia Philipovna, with undisguised
contempt.

“Oh, she was turned out next day, of course. It’s a very strict
household, there!”

“And you allowed it?”

“I should think so, rather! I was not going to return and confess next
day,” laughed Ferdishenko, who seemed a little surprised at the
disagreeable impression which his story had made on all parties.

“How mean you were!” said Nastasia.

“Bah! you wish to hear a man tell of his worst actions, and you expect
the story to come out goody-goody! One’s worst actions always are mean.
We shall see what the general has to say for himself now. All is not
gold that glitters, you know; and because a man keeps his carriage he
need not be specially virtuous, I assure you, all sorts of people keep
carriages. And by what means?”

In a word, Ferdishenko was very angry and rapidly forgetting himself;
his whole face was drawn with passion. Strange as it may appear, he had
expected much better success for his story. These little errors of
taste on Ferdishenko’s part occurred very frequently. Nastasia trembled
with rage, and looked fixedly at him, whereupon he relapsed into
alarmed silence. He realized that he had gone a little too far.

“Had we not better end this game?” asked Totski.

“It’s my turn, but I plead exemption,” said Ptitsin.

“You don’t care to oblige us?” asked Nastasia.

“I cannot, I assure you. I confess I do not understand how anyone can
play this game.”

“Then, general, it’s your turn,” continued Nastasia Philipovna, “and if
you refuse, the whole game will fall through, which will disappoint me
very much, for I was looking forward to relating a certain ‘page of my
own life.’ I am only waiting for you and Afanasy Ivanovitch to have
your turns, for I require the support of your example,” she added,
smiling.

“Oh, if you put it in that way,” cried the general, excitedly, “I’m
ready to tell the whole story of my life, but I must confess that I
prepared a little story in anticipation of my turn.”

Nastasia smiled amiably at him; but evidently her depression and
irritability were increasing with every moment. Totski was dreadfully
alarmed to hear her promise a revelation out of her own life.

“I, like everyone else,” began the general, “have committed certain not
altogether graceful actions, so to speak, during the course of my life.
But the strangest thing of all in my case is, that I should consider
the little anecdote which I am now about to give you as a confession of
the worst of my ‘bad actions.’ It is thirty-five years since it all
happened, and yet I cannot to this very day recall the circumstances
without, as it were, a sudden pang at the heart.

“It was a silly affair—I was an ensign at the time. You know
ensigns—their blood is boiling water, their circumstances generally
penurious. Well, I had a servant Nikifor who used to do everything for
me in my quarters, economized and managed for me, and even laid hands
on anything he could find (belonging to other people), in order to
augment our household goods; but a faithful, honest fellow all the
same.

“I was strict, but just by nature. At that time we were stationed in a
small town. I was quartered at an old widow’s house, a lieutenant’s
widow of eighty years of age. She lived in a wretched little wooden
house, and had not even a servant, so poor was she.

“Her relations had all died off—her husband was dead and buried forty
years since; and a niece, who had lived with her and bullied her up to
three years ago, was dead too; so that she was quite alone.

“Well, I was precious dull with her, especially as she was so childish
that there was nothing to be got out of her. Eventually, she stole a
fowl of mine; the business is a mystery to this day; but it could have
been no one but herself. I requested to be quartered somewhere else,
and was shifted to the other end of the town, to the house of a
merchant with a large family, and a long beard, as I remember him.
Nikifor and I were delighted to go; but the old lady was not pleased at
our departure.

“Well, a day or two afterwards, when I returned from drill, Nikifor
says to me: ‘We oughtn’t to have left our tureen with the old lady,
I’ve nothing to serve the soup in.’

“I asked how it came about that the tureen had been left. Nikifor
explained that the old lady refused to give it up, because, she said,
we had broken her bowl, and she must have our tureen in place of it;
she had declared that I had so arranged the matter with herself.

“This baseness on her part of course aroused my young blood to fever
heat; I jumped up, and away I flew.

“I arrived at the old woman’s house beside myself. She was sitting in a
corner all alone, leaning her face on her hand. I fell on her like a
clap of thunder. ‘You old wretch!’ I yelled and all that sort of thing,
in real Russian style. Well, when I began cursing at her, a strange
thing happened. I looked at her, and she stared back with her eyes
starting out of her head, but she did not say a word. She seemed to
sway about as she sat, and looked and looked at me in the strangest
way. Well, I soon stopped swearing and looked closer at her, asked her
questions, but not a word could I get out of her. The flies were
buzzing about the room and only this sound broke the silence; the sun
was setting outside; I didn’t know what to make of it, so I went away.

“Before I reached home I was met and summoned to the major’s, so that
it was some while before I actually got there. When I came in, Nikifor
met me. ‘Have you heard, sir, that our old lady is dead?’ ‘_dead_,
when?’ ‘Oh, an hour and a half ago.’ That meant nothing more nor less
than that she was dying at the moment when I pounced on her and began
abusing her.

“This produced a great effect upon me. I used to dream of the poor old
woman at nights. I really am not superstitious, but two days after, I
went to her funeral, and as time went on I thought more and more about
her. I said to myself, ‘This woman, this human being, lived to a great
age. She had children, a husband and family, friends and relations; her
household was busy and cheerful; she was surrounded by smiling faces;
and then suddenly they are gone, and she is left alone like a solitary
fly... like a fly, cursed with the burden of her age. At last, God
calls her to Himself. At sunset, on a lovely summer’s evening, my
little old woman passes away—a thought, you will notice, which offers
much food for reflection—and behold! instead of tears and prayers to
start her on her last journey, she has insults and jeers from a young
ensign, who stands before her with his hands in his pockets, making a
terrible row about a soup tureen!’ Of course I was to blame, and even
now that I have time to look back at it calmly, I pity the poor old
thing no less. I repeat that I wonder at myself, for after all I was
not really responsible. Why did she take it into her head to die at
that moment? But the more I thought of it, the more I felt the weight
of it upon my mind; and I never got quite rid of the impression until I
put a couple of old women into an almshouse and kept them there at my
own expense. There, that’s all. I repeat I dare say I have committed
many a grievous sin in my day; but I cannot help always looking back
upon this as the worst action I have ever perpetrated.”

“H’m! and instead of a bad action, your excellency has detailed one of
your noblest deeds,” said Ferdishenko. “Ferdishenko is ‘done.’”

“Dear me, general,” said Nastasia Philipovna, absently, “I really never
imagined you had such a good heart.”

The general laughed with great satisfaction, and applied himself once
more to the champagne.

It was now Totski’s turn, and his story was awaited with great
curiosity—while all eyes turned on Nastasia Philipovna, as though
anticipating that his revelation must be connected somehow with her.
Nastasia, during the whole of his story, pulled at the lace trimming of
her sleeve, and never once glanced at the speaker. Totski was a
handsome man, rather stout, with a very polite and dignified manner. He
was always well dressed, and his linen was exquisite. He had plump
white hands, and wore a magnificent diamond ring on one finger.

“What simplifies the duty before me considerably, in my opinion,” he
began, “is that I am bound to recall and relate the very worst action
of my life. In such circumstances there can, of course, be no doubt.
One’s conscience very soon informs one what is the proper narrative to
tell. I admit, that among the many silly and thoughtless actions of my
life, the memory of one comes prominently forward and reminds me that
it lay long like a stone on my heart. Some twenty years since, I paid a
visit to Platon Ordintzeff at his country-house. He had just been
elected marshal of the nobility, and had come there with his young wife
for the winter holidays. Anfisa Alexeyevna’s birthday came off just
then, too, and there were two balls arranged. At that time Dumas-fils’
beautiful work, _La Dame aux Camélias_—a novel which I consider
imperishable—had just come into fashion. In the provinces all the
ladies were in raptures over it, those who had read it, at least.
Camellias were all the fashion. Everyone inquired for them, everybody
wanted them; and a grand lot of camellias are to be got in a country
town—as you all know—and two balls to provide for!

“Poor Peter Volhofskoi was desperately in love with Anfisa Alexeyevna.
I don’t know whether there was anything—I mean I don’t know whether he
could possibly have indulged in any hope. The poor fellow was beside
himself to get her a bouquet of camellias. Countess Sotski and Sophia
Bespalova, as everyone knew, were coming with white camellia bouquets.
Anfisa wished for red ones, for effect. Well, her husband Platon was
driven desperate to find some. And the day before the ball, Anfisa’s
rival snapped up the only red camellias to be had in the place, from
under Platon’s nose, and Platon—wretched man—was done for. Now if Peter
had only been able to step in at this moment with a red bouquet, his
little hopes might have made gigantic strides. A woman’s gratitude
under such circumstances would have been boundless—but it was
practically an impossibility.

“The night before the ball I met Peter, looking radiant. ‘What is it?’
I ask. ‘I’ve found them, Eureka!’ ‘No! where, where?’ ‘At Ekshaisk (a
little town fifteen miles off) there’s a rich old merchant, who keeps a
lot of canaries, has no children, and he and his wife are devoted to
flowers. He’s got some camellias.’ ‘And what if he won’t let you have
them?’ ‘I’ll go on my knees and implore till I get them. I won’t go
away.’ ‘When shall you start?’ ‘Tomorrow morning at five o’clock.’ ‘Go
on,’ I said, ‘and good luck to you.’

“I was glad for the poor fellow, and went home. But an idea got hold of
me somehow. I don’t know how. It was nearly two in the morning. I rang
the bell and ordered the coachman to be waked up and sent to me. He
came. I gave him a tip of fifteen roubles, and told him to get the
carriage ready at once. In half an hour it was at the door. I got in
and off we went.

“By five I drew up at the Ekshaisky inn. I waited there till dawn, and
soon after six I was off, and at the old merchant Trepalaf’s.

“‘Camellias!’ I said, ‘father, save me, save me, let me have some
camellias!’ He was a tall, grey old man—a terrible-looking old
gentleman. ‘Not a bit of it,’ he says. ‘I won’t.’ Down I went on my
knees. ‘Don’t say so, don’t—think what you’re doing!’ I cried; ‘it’s a
matter of life and death!’ ‘If that’s the case, take them,’ says he. So
up I get, and cut such a bouquet of red camellias! He had a whole
greenhouse full of them—lovely ones. The old fellow sighs. I pull out a
hundred roubles. ‘No, no!’ says he, ‘don’t insult me that way.’ ‘Oh, if
that’s the case, give it to the village hospital,’ I say. ‘Ah,’ he
says, ‘that’s quite a different matter; that’s good of you and
generous. I’ll pay it in there for you with pleasure.’ I liked that old
fellow, Russian to the core, _de la vraie souche_. I went home in
raptures, but took another road in order to avoid Peter. Immediately on
arriving I sent up the bouquet for Anfisa to see when she awoke.

“You may imagine her ecstasy, her gratitude. The wretched Platon, who
had almost died since yesterday of the reproaches showered upon him,
wept on my shoulder. Of course poor Peter had no chance after this.

“I thought he would cut my throat at first, and went about armed ready
to meet him. But he took it differently; he fainted, and had brain
fever and convulsions. A month after, when he had hardly recovered, he
went off to the Crimea, and there he was shot.

“I assure you this business left me no peace for many a long year. Why
did I do it? I was not in love with her myself; I’m afraid it was
simply mischief—pure ‘cussedness’ on my part.

“If I hadn’t seized that bouquet from under his nose he might have been
alive now, and a happy man. He might have been successful in life, and
never have gone to fight the Turks.”

Totski ended his tale with the same dignity that had characterized its
commencement.

Nastasia Philipovna’s eyes were flashing in a most unmistakable way,
now; and her lips were all a-quiver by the time Totski finished his
story.

All present watched both of them with curiosity.

“You were right, Totski,” said Nastasia, “it is a dull game and a
stupid one. I’ll just tell my story, as I promised, and then we’ll play
cards.”

“Yes, but let’s have the story first!” cried the general.

“Prince,” said Nastasia Philipovna, unexpectedly turning to Muishkin,
“here are my old friends, Totski and General Epanchin, who wish to
marry me off. Tell me what you think. Shall I marry or not? As you
decide, so shall it be.”

Totski grew white as a sheet. The general was struck dumb. All present
started and listened intently. Gania sat rooted to his chair.

“Marry whom?” asked the prince, faintly.

“Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin,” said Nastasia, firmly and evenly.

There were a few seconds of dead silence.

The prince tried to speak, but could not form his words; a great weight
seemed to lie upon his breast and suffocate him.

“N-no! don’t marry him!” he whispered at last, drawing his breath with
an effort.

“So be it, then. Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” she spoke solemnly and
forcibly, “you hear the prince’s decision? Take it as my decision; and
let that be the end of the matter for good and all.”

“Nastasia Philipovna!” cried Totski, in a quaking voice.

“Nastasia Philipovna!” said the general, in persuasive but agitated
tones.

Everyone in the room fidgeted in their places, and waited to see what
was coming next.

“Well, gentlemen!” she continued, gazing around in apparent
astonishment; “what do you all look so alarmed about? Why are you so
upset?”

“But—recollect, Nastasia Philipovna,” stammered Totski, “you gave a
promise, quite a free one, and—and you might have spared us this. I am
confused and bewildered, I know; but, in a word, at such a moment, and
before company, and all so-so-irregular, finishing off a game with a
serious matter like this, a matter of honour, and of heart, and—”

“I don’t follow you, Afanasy Ivanovitch; you are losing your head. In
the first place, what do you mean by ‘before company’? Isn’t the
company good enough for you? And what’s all that about ‘a game’? I
wished to tell my little story, and I told it! Don’t you like it? You
heard what I said to the prince? ‘As you decide, so it shall be!’ If he
had said ‘yes,’ I should have given my consent! But he said ‘no,’ so I
refused. Here was my whole life hanging on his one word! Surely I was
serious enough?”

“The prince! What on earth has the prince got to do with it? Who the
deuce is the prince?” cried the general, who could conceal his wrath no
longer.

“The prince has this to do with it—that I see in him for the first time
in all my life, a man endowed with real truthfulness of spirit, and I
trust him. He trusted me at first sight, and I trust him!”

“It only remains for me, then, to thank Nastasia Philipovna for the
great delicacy with which she has treated me,” said Gania, as pale as
death, and with quivering lips. “That is my plain duty, of course; but
the prince—what has he to do in the matter?”

“I see what you are driving at,” said Nastasia Philipovna. “You imply
that the prince is after the seventy-five thousand roubles—I quite
understand you. Mr. Totski, I forgot to say, ‘Take your seventy-five
thousand roubles’—I don’t want them. I let you go free for nothing—take
your freedom! You must need it. Nine years and three months’ captivity
is enough for anybody. Tomorrow I shall start afresh—today I am a free
agent for the first time in my life.

“General, you must take your pearls back, too—give them to your
wife—here they are! Tomorrow I shall leave this flat altogether, and
then there’ll be no more of these pleasant little social gatherings,
ladies and gentlemen.”

So saying, she scornfully rose from her seat as though to depart.

“Nastasia Philipovna! Nastasia Philipovna!”

The words burst involuntarily from every mouth. All present started up
in bewildered excitement; all surrounded her; all had listened uneasily
to her wild, disconnected sentences. All felt that something had
happened, something had gone very far wrong indeed, but no one could
make head or tail of the matter.

At this moment there was a furious ring at the bell, and a great knock
at the door—exactly similar to the one which had startled the company
at Gania’s house in the afternoon.

“Ah, ah! here’s the climax at last, at half-past twelve!” cried
Nastasia Philipovna. “Sit down, gentlemen, I beg you. Something is
about to happen.”

So saying, she reseated herself; a strange smile played on her lips.
She sat quite still, but watched the door in a fever of impatience.

“Rogojin and his hundred thousand roubles, no doubt of it,” muttered
Ptitsin to himself.

XV.

Katia, the maid-servant, made her appearance, terribly frightened.

“Goodness knows what it means, ma’am,” she said. “There is a whole
collection of men come—all tipsy—and want to see you. They say that
‘it’s Rogojin, and she knows all about it.’”

“It’s all right, Katia, let them all in at once.”

“Surely not _all_, ma’am? They seem so disorderly—it’s dreadful to see
them.”

“Yes _all_, Katia, all—every one of them. Let them in, or they’ll come
in whether you like or no. Listen! what a noise they are making!
Perhaps you are offended, gentlemen, that I should receive such guests
in your presence? I am very sorry, and ask your forgiveness, but it
cannot be helped—and I should be very grateful if you could all stay
and witness this climax. However, just as you please, of course.”

The guests exchanged glances; they were annoyed and bewildered by the
episode; but it was clear enough that all this had been pre-arranged
and expected by Nastasia Philipovna, and that there was no use in
trying to stop her now—for she was little short of insane.

Besides, they were naturally inquisitive to see what was to happen.
There was nobody who would be likely to feel much alarm. There were but
two ladies present; one of whom was the lively actress, who was not
easily frightened, and the other the silent German beauty who, it
turned out, did not understand a word of Russian, and seemed to be as
stupid as she was lovely.

Her acquaintances invited her to their “At Homes” because she was so
decorative. She was exhibited to their guests like a valuable picture,
or vase, or statue, or firescreen. As for the men, Ptitsin was one of
Rogojin’s friends; Ferdishenko was as much at home as a fish in the
sea, Gania, not yet recovered from his amazement, appeared to be
chained to a pillory. The old professor did not in the least understand
what was happening; but when he noticed how extremely agitated the
mistress of the house, and her friends, seemed, he nearly wept, and
trembled with fright: but he would rather have died than leave Nastasia
Philipovna at such a crisis, for he loved her as if she were his own
granddaughter. Afanasy Ivanovitch greatly disliked having anything to
do with the affair, but he was too much interested to leave, in spite
of the mad turn things had taken; and a few words that had dropped from
the lips of Nastasia puzzled him so much, that he felt he could not go
without an explanation. He resolved therefore, to see it out, and to
adopt the attitude of silent spectator, as most suited to his dignity.
General Epanchin alone determined to depart. He was annoyed at the
manner in which his gift had been returned, as though he had
condescended, under the influence of passion, to place himself on a
level with Ptitsin and Ferdishenko, his self-respect and sense of duty
now returned together with a consciousness of what was due to his
social rank and official importance. In short, he plainly showed his
conviction that a man in his position could have nothing to do with
Rogojin and his companions. But Nastasia interrupted him at his first
words.

“Ah, general!” she cried, “I was forgetting! If I had only foreseen
this unpleasantness! I won’t insist on keeping you against your will,
although I should have liked you to be beside me now. In any case, I am
most grateful to you for your visit, and flattering attention... but if
you are afraid...”

“Excuse me, Nastasia Philipovna,” interrupted the general, with
chivalric generosity. “To whom are you speaking? I have remained until
now simply because of my devotion to you, and as for danger, I am only
afraid that the carpets may be ruined, and the furniture smashed!...
You should shut the door on the lot, in my opinion. But I confess that
I am extremely curious to see how it ends.”

“Rogojin!” announced Ferdishenko.

“What do you think about it?” said the general in a low voice to
Totski. “Is she mad? I mean mad in the medical sense of the word ....
eh?”

“I’ve always said she was predisposed to it,” whispered Afanasy
Ivanovitch slyly. “Perhaps it is a fever!”

Since their visit to Gania’s home, Rogojin’s followers had been
increased by two new recruits—a dissolute old man, the hero of some
ancient scandal, and a retired sub-lieutenant. A laughable story was
told of the former. He possessed, it was said, a set of false teeth,
and one day when he wanted money for a drinking orgy, he pawned them,
and was never able to reclaim them! The officer appeared to be a rival
of the gentleman who was so proud of his fists. He was known to none of
Rogojin’s followers, but as they passed by the Nevsky, where he stood
begging, he had joined their ranks. His claim for the charity he
desired seemed based on the fact that in the days of his prosperity he
had given away as much as fifteen roubles at a time. The rivals seemed
more than a little jealous of one another. The athlete appeared injured
at the admission of the “beggar” into the company. By nature taciturn,
he now merely growled occasionally like a bear, and glared
contemptuously upon the “beggar,” who, being somewhat of a man of the
world, and a diplomatist, tried to insinuate himself into the bear’s
good graces. He was a much smaller man than the athlete, and doubtless
was conscious that he must tread warily. Gently and without argument he
alluded to the advantages of the English style in boxing, and showed
himself a firm believer in Western institutions. The athlete’s lips
curled disdainfully, and without honouring his adversary with a formal
denial, he exhibited, as if by accident, that peculiarly Russian
object—an enormous fist, clenched, muscular, and covered with red
hairs! The sight of this pre-eminently national attribute was enough to
convince anybody, without words, that it was a serious matter for those
who should happen to come into contact with it.

None of the band were very drunk, for the leader had kept his intended
visit to Nastasia in view all day, and had done his best to prevent his
followers from drinking too much. He was sober himself, but the
excitement of this chaotic day—the strangest day of his life—had
affected him so that he was in a dazed, wild condition, which almost
resembled drunkenness.

He had kept but one idea before him all day, and for that he had worked
in an agony of anxiety and a fever of suspense. His lieutenants had
worked so hard from five o’clock until eleven, that they actually had
collected a hundred thousand roubles for him, but at such terrific
expense, that the rate of interest was only mentioned among them in
whispers and with bated breath.

As before, Rogojin walked in advance of his troop, who followed him
with mingled self-assertion and timidity. They were specially
frightened of Nastasia Philipovna herself, for some reason.

Many of them expected to be thrown downstairs at once, without further
ceremony, the elegant and irresistible Zaleshoff among them. But the
party led by the athlete, without openly showing their hostile
intentions, silently nursed contempt and even hatred for Nastasia
Philipovna, and marched into her house as they would have marched into
an enemy’s fortress. Arrived there, the luxury of the rooms seemed to
inspire them with a kind of respect, not unmixed with alarm. So many
things were entirely new to their experience—the choice furniture, the
pictures, the great statue of Venus. They followed their chief into the
salon, however, with a kind of impudent curiosity. There, the sight of
General Epanchin among the guests, caused many of them to beat a hasty
retreat into the adjoining room, the “boxer” and “beggar” being among
the first to go. A few only, of whom Lebedeff made one, stood their
ground; he had contrived to walk side by side with Rogojin, for he
quite understood the importance of a man who had a fortune of a million
odd roubles, and who at this moment carried a hundred thousand in his
hand. It may be added that the whole company, not excepting Lebedeff,
had the vaguest idea of the extent of their powers, and of how far they
could safely go. At some moments Lebedeff was sure that right was on
their side; at others he tried uneasily to remember various cheering
and reassuring articles of the Civil Code.

Rogojin, when he stepped into the room, and his eyes fell upon
Nastasia, stopped short, grew white as a sheet, and stood staring; it
was clear that his heart was beating painfully. So he stood, gazing
intently, but timidly, for a few seconds. Suddenly, as though bereft of
his senses, he moved forward, staggering helplessly, towards the table.
On his way he collided against Ptitsin’s chair, and put his dirty foot
on the lace skirt of the silent lady’s dress; but he neither apologized
for this, nor even noticed it.

On reaching the table, he placed upon it a strange-looking object,
which he had carried with him into the drawing-room. This was a paper
packet, some six or seven inches thick, and eight or nine in length,
wrapped in an old newspaper, and tied round three or four times with
string.

Having placed this before her, he stood with drooped arms and head, as
though awaiting his sentence.

His costume was the same as it had been in the morning, except for a
new silk handkerchief round his neck, bright green and red, fastened
with a huge diamond pin, and an enormous diamond ring on his dirty
forefinger.

Lebedeff stood two or three paces behind his chief; and the rest of the
band waited about near the door.

The two maid-servants were both peeping in, frightened and amazed at
this unusual and disorderly scene.

“What is that?” asked Nastasia Philipovna, gazing intently at Rogojin,
and indicating the paper packet.

“A hundred thousand,” replied the latter, almost in a whisper.

“Oh! so he kept his word—there’s a man for you! Well, sit down,
please—take that chair. I shall have something to say to you presently.
Who are all these with you? The same party? Let them come in and sit
down. There’s room on that sofa, there are some chairs and there’s
another sofa! Well, why don’t they sit down?”

Sure enough, some of the brave fellows entirely lost their heads at
this point, and retreated into the next room. Others, however, took the
hint and sat down, as far as they could from the table, however;
feeling braver in proportion to their distance from Nastasia.

Rogojin took the chair offered him, but he did not sit long; he soon
stood up again, and did not reseat himself. Little by little he began
to look around him and discern the other guests. Seeing Gania, he
smiled venomously and muttered to himself, “Look at that!”

He gazed at Totski and the general with no apparent confusion, and with
very little curiosity. But when he observed that the prince was seated
beside Nastasia Philipovna, he could not take his eyes off him for a
long while, and was clearly amazed. He could not account for the
prince’s presence there. It was not in the least surprising that
Rogojin should be, at this time, in a more or less delirious condition;
for not to speak of the excitements of the day, he had spent the night
before in the train, and had not slept more than a wink for forty-eight
hours.

“This, gentlemen, is a hundred thousand roubles,” said Nastasia
Philipovna, addressing the company in general, “here, in this dirty
parcel. This afternoon Rogojin yelled, like a madman, that he would
bring me a hundred thousand in the evening, and I have been waiting for
him all the while. He was bargaining for me, you know; first he offered
me eighteen thousand; then he rose to forty, and then to a hundred
thousand. And he has kept his word, see! My goodness, how white he is!
All this happened this afternoon, at Gania’s. I had gone to pay his
mother a visit—my future family, you know! And his sister said to my
very face, surely somebody will turn this shameless creature out. After
which she spat in her brother Gania’s face—a girl of character, that!”

“Nastasia Philipovna!” began the general, reproachfully. He was
beginning to put his own interpretation on the affair.

“Well, what, general? Not quite good form, eh? Oh, nonsense! Here have
I been sitting in my box at the French theatre for the last five years
like a statue of inaccessible virtue, and kept out of the way of all
admirers, like a silly little idiot! Now, there’s this man, who comes
and pays down his hundred thousand on the table, before you all, in
spite of my five years of innocence and proud virtue, and I dare be
sworn he has his sledge outside waiting to carry me off. He values me
at a hundred thousand! I see you are still angry with me, Gania! Why,
surely you never really wished to take _me_ into your family? _me_,
Rogojin’s mistress! What did the prince say just now?”

“I never said you were Rogojin’s mistress—you are _not!_” said the
prince, in trembling accents.

“Nastasia Philipovna, dear soul!” cried the actress, impatiently, “do
be calm, dear! If it annoys you so—all this—do go away and rest! Of
course you would never go with this wretched fellow, in spite of his
hundred thousand roubles! Take his money and kick him out of the house;
that’s the way to treat him and the likes of him! Upon my word, if it
were my business, I’d soon clear them all out!”

The actress was a kind-hearted woman, and highly impressionable. She
was very angry now.

“Don’t be cross, Daria Alexeyevna!” laughed Nastasia. “I was not angry
when I spoke; I wasn’t reproaching Gania. I don’t know how it was that
I ever could have indulged the whim of entering an honest family like
his. I saw his mother—and kissed her hand, too. I came and stirred up
all that fuss, Gania, this afternoon, on purpose to see how much you
could swallow—you surprised me, my friend—you did, indeed. Surely you
could not marry a woman who accepts pearls like those you knew the
general was going to give me, on the very eve of her marriage? And
Rogojin! Why, in your own house and before your own brother and sister,
he bargained with me! Yet you could come here and expect to be
betrothed to me before you left the house! You almost brought your
sister, too. Surely what Rogojin said about you is not really true:
that you would crawl all the way to the other end of the town, on hands
and knees, for three roubles?”

“Yes, he would!” said Rogojin, quietly, but with an air of absolute
conviction.

“H’m! and he receives a good salary, I’m told. Well, what should you
get but disgrace and misery if you took a wife you hated into your
family (for I know very well that you do hate me)? No, no! I believe
now that a man like you would murder anyone for money—sharpen a razor
and come up behind his best friend and cut his throat like a sheep—I’ve
read of such people. Everyone seems money-mad nowadays. No, no! I may
be shameless, but you are far worse. I don’t say a word about that
other—”

“Nastasia Philipovna, is this really you? You, once so refined and
delicate of speech. Oh, what a tongue! What dreadful things you are
saying,” cried the general, wringing his hands in real grief.

“I am intoxicated, general. I am having a day out, you know—it’s my
birthday! I have long looked forward to this happy occasion. Daria
Alexeyevna, you see that nosegay-man, that Monsieur aux Camelias,
sitting there laughing at us?”

“I am not laughing, Nastasia Philipovna; I am only listening with all
my attention,” said Totski, with dignity.

“Well, why have I worried him, for five years, and never let him go
free? Is he worth it? He is only just what he ought to be—nothing
particular. He thinks I am to blame, too. He gave me my education, kept
me like a countess. Money—my word! What a lot of money he spent over
me! And he tried to find me an honest husband first, and then this
Gania, here. And what do you think? All these five years I did not live
with him, and yet I took his money, and considered I was quite
justified.

“You say, take the hundred thousand and kick that man out. It is true,
it is an abominable business, as you say. I might have married long
ago, not Gania—Oh, no!—but that would have been abominable too.

“Would you believe it, I had some thoughts of marrying Totski, four
years ago! I meant mischief, I confess—but I could have had him, I give
you my word; he asked me himself. But I thought, no! it’s not
worthwhile to take such advantage of him. No! I had better go on to the
streets, or accept Rogojin, or become a washerwoman or something—for I
have nothing of my own, you know. I shall go away and leave everything
behind, to the last rag—he shall have it all back. And who would take
me without anything? Ask Gania, there, whether he would. Why, even
Ferdishenko wouldn’t have me!”

“No, Ferdishenko would not; he is a candid fellow, Nastasia
Philipovna,” said that worthy. “But the prince would. You sit here
making complaints, but just look at the prince. I’ve been observing him
for a long while.”

Nastasia Philipovna looked keenly round at the prince.

“Is that true?” she asked.

“Quite true,” whispered the prince.

“You’ll take me as I am, with nothing?”

“I will, Nastasia Philipovna.”

“Here’s a pretty business!” cried the general. “However, it might have
been expected of him.”

The prince continued to regard Nastasia with a sorrowful, but intent
and piercing, gaze.

“Here’s another alternative for me,” said Nastasia, turning once more
to the actress; “and he does it out of pure kindness of heart. I know
him. I’ve found a benefactor. Perhaps, though, what they say about him
may be true—that he’s an—we know what. And what shall you live on, if
you are really so madly in love with Rogojin’s mistress, that you are
ready to marry her—eh?”

“I take you as a good, honest woman, Nastasia Philipovna—not as
Rogojin’s mistress.”

“Who? I?—good and honest?”

“Yes, you.”

“Oh, you get those ideas out of novels, you know. Times are changed
now, dear prince; the world sees things as they really are. That’s all
nonsense. Besides, how can you marry? You need a nurse, not a wife.”

The prince rose and began to speak in a trembling, timid tone, but with
the air of a man absolutely sure of the truth of his words.

“I know nothing, Nastasia Philipovna. I have seen nothing. You are
right so far; but I consider that you would be honouring me, and not I
you. I am a nobody. You have suffered, you have passed through hell and
emerged pure, and that is very much. Why do you shame yourself by
desiring to go with Rogojin? You are delirious. You have returned to
Mr. Totski his seventy-five thousand roubles, and declared that you
will leave this house and all that is in it, which is a line of conduct
that not one person here would imitate. Nastasia Philipovna, I love
you! I would die for you. I shall never let any man say one word
against you, Nastasia Philipovna! and if we are poor, I can work for
both.”

As the prince spoke these last words a titter was heard from
Ferdishenko; Lebedeff laughed too. The general grunted with irritation;
Ptitsin and Totski barely restrained their smiles. The rest all sat
listening, open-mouthed with wonder.

“But perhaps we shall not be poor; we may be very rich, Nastasia
Philipovna,” continued the prince, in the same timid, quivering tones.
“I don’t know for certain, and I’m sorry to say I haven’t had an
opportunity of finding out all day; but I received a letter from
Moscow, while I was in Switzerland, from a Mr. Salaskin, and he
acquaints me with the fact that I am entitled to a very large
inheritance. This letter—”

The prince pulled a letter out of his pocket.

“Is he raving?” said the general. “Are we really in a mad-house?”

There was silence for a moment. Then Ptitsin spoke.

“I think you said, prince, that your letter was from Salaskin? Salaskin
is a very eminent man, indeed, in his own world; he is a wonderfully
clever solicitor, and if he really tells you this, I think you may be
pretty sure that he is right. It so happens, luckily, that I know his
handwriting, for I have lately had business with him. If you would
allow me to see it, I should perhaps be able to tell you.”

The prince held out the letter silently, but with a shaking hand.

“What, what?” said the general, much agitated.

“What’s all this? Is he really heir to anything?”

All present concentrated their attention upon Ptitsin, reading the
prince’s letter. The general curiosity had received a new fillip.
Ferdishenko could not sit still. Rogojin fixed his eyes first on the
prince, and then on Ptitsin, and then back again; he was extremely
agitated. Lebedeff could not stand it. He crept up and read over
Ptitsin’s shoulder, with the air of a naughty boy who expects a box on
the ear every moment for his indiscretion.

XVI.

“It’s good business,” said Ptitsin, at last, folding the letter and
handing it back to the prince. “You will receive, without the slightest
trouble, by the last will and testament of your aunt, a very large sum
of money indeed.”

“Impossible!” cried the general, starting up as if he had been shot.

Ptitsin explained, for the benefit of the company, that the prince’s
aunt had died five months since. He had never known her, but she was
his mother’s own sister, the daughter of a Moscow merchant, one
Paparchin, who had died a bankrupt. But the elder brother of this same
Paparchin, had been an eminent and very rich merchant. A year since it
had so happened that his only two sons had both died within the same
month. This sad event had so affected the old man that he, too, had
died very shortly after. He was a widower, and had no relations left,
excepting the prince’s aunt, a poor woman living on charity, who was
herself at the point of death from dropsy; but who had time, before she
died, to set Salaskin to work to find her nephew, and to make her will
bequeathing her newly-acquired fortune to him.

It appeared that neither the prince, nor the doctor with whom he lived
in Switzerland, had thought of waiting for further communications; but
the prince had started straight away with Salaskin’s letter in his
pocket.

“One thing I may tell you, for certain,” concluded Ptitsin, addressing
the prince, “that there is no question about the authenticity of this
matter. Anything that Salaskin writes you as regards your
unquestionable right to this inheritance, you may look upon as so much
money in your pocket. I congratulate you, prince; you may receive a
million and a half of roubles, perhaps more; I don’t know. All I _do_
know is that Paparchin was a very rich merchant indeed.”

“Hurrah!” cried Lebedeff, in a drunken voice. “Hurrah for the last of
the Muishkins!”

“My goodness me! and I gave him twenty-five roubles this morning as
though he were a beggar,” blurted out the general, half senseless with
amazement. “Well, I congratulate you, I congratulate you!” And the
general rose from his seat and solemnly embraced the prince. All came
forward with congratulations; even those of Rogojin’s party who had
retreated into the next room, now crept softly back to look on. For the
moment even Nastasia Philipovna was forgotten.

But gradually the consciousness crept back into the minds of each one
present that the prince had just made her an offer of marriage. The
situation had, therefore, become three times as fantastic as before.

Totski sat and shrugged his shoulders, bewildered. He was the only
guest left sitting at this time; the others had thronged round the
table in disorder, and were all talking at once.

It was generally agreed, afterwards, in recalling that evening, that
from this moment Nastasia Philipovna seemed entirely to lose her
senses. She continued to sit still in her place, looking around at her
guests with a strange, bewildered expression, as though she were trying
to collect her thoughts, and could not. Then she suddenly turned to the
prince, and glared at him with frowning brows; but this only lasted one
moment. Perhaps it suddenly struck her that all this was a jest, but
his face seemed to reassure her. She reflected, and smiled again,
vaguely.

“So I am really a princess,” she whispered to herself, ironically, and
glancing accidentally at Daria Alexeyevna’s face, she burst out
laughing.

“Ha, ha, ha!” she cried, “this is an unexpected climax, after all. I
didn’t expect this. What are you all standing up for, gentlemen? Sit
down; congratulate me and the prince! Ferdishenko, just step out and
order some more champagne, will you? Katia, Pasha,” she added suddenly,
seeing the servants at the door, “come here! I’m going to be married,
did you hear? To the prince. He has a million and a half of roubles; he
is Prince Muishkin, and has asked me to marry him. Here, prince, come
and sit by me; and here comes the wine. Now then, ladies and gentlemen,
where are your congratulations?”

“Hurrah!” cried a number of voices. A rush was made for the wine by
Rogojin’s followers, though, even among them, there seemed some sort of
realization that the situation had changed. Rogojin stood and looked
on, with an incredulous smile, screwing up one side of his mouth.

“Prince, my dear fellow, do remember what you are about,” said the
general, approaching Muishkin, and pulling him by the coat sleeve.

Nastasia Philipovna overheard the remark, and burst out laughing.

“No, no, general!” she cried. “You had better look out! I am the
princess now, you know. The prince won’t let you insult me. Afanasy
Ivanovitch, why don’t you congratulate me? I shall be able to sit at
table with your new wife, now. Aha! you see what I gain by marrying a
prince! A million and a half, and a prince, and an idiot into the
bargain, they say. What better could I wish for? Life is only just
about to commence for me in earnest. Rogojin, you are a little too
late. Away with your paper parcel! I’m going to marry the prince; I’m
richer than you are now.”

But Rogojin understood how things were tending, at last. An
inexpressibly painful expression came over his face. He wrung his
hands; a groan made its way up from the depths of his soul.

“Surrender her, for God’s sake!” he said to the prince.

All around burst out laughing.

“What? Surrender her to _you?_” cried Daria Alexeyevna. “To a fellow
who comes and bargains for a wife like a moujik! The prince wishes to
marry her, and you—”

“So do I, so do I! This moment, if I could! I’d give every farthing I
have to do it.”

“You drunken moujik,” said Daria Alexeyevna, once more. “You ought to
be kicked out of the place.”

The laughter became louder than ever.

“Do you hear, prince?” said Nastasia Philipovna. “Do you hear how this
moujik of a fellow goes on bargaining for your bride?”

“He is drunk,” said the prince, quietly, “and he loves you very much.”

“Won’t you be ashamed, afterwards, to reflect that your wife very
nearly ran away with Rogojin?”

“Oh, you were raving, you were in a fever; you are still half
delirious.”

“And won’t you be ashamed when they tell you, afterwards, that your
wife lived at Totski’s expense so many years?”

“No; I shall not be ashamed of that. You did not so live by your own
will.”

“And you’ll never reproach me with it?”

“Never.”

“Take care, don’t commit yourself for a whole lifetime.”

“Nastasia Philipovna.” said the prince, quietly, and with deep emotion,
“I said before that I shall esteem your consent to be my wife as a
great honour to myself, and shall consider that it is you who will
honour me, not I you, by our marriage. You laughed at these words, and
others around us laughed as well; I heard them. Very likely I expressed
myself funnily, and I may have looked funny, but, for all that, I
believe I understand where honour lies, and what I said was but the
literal truth. You were about to ruin yourself just now, irrevocably;
you would never have forgiven yourself for so doing afterwards; and
yet, you are absolutely blameless. It is impossible that your life
should be altogether ruined at your age. What matter that Rogojin came
bargaining here, and that Gavrila Ardalionovitch would have deceived
you if he could? Why do you continually remind us of these facts? I
assure you once more that very few could find it in them to act as you
have acted this day. As for your wish to go with Rogojin, that was
simply the idea of a delirious and suffering brain. You are still quite
feverish; you ought to be in bed, not here. You know quite well that if
you had gone with Rogojin, you would have become a washer-woman next
day, rather than stay with him. You are proud, Nastasia Philipovna, and
perhaps you have really suffered so much that you imagine yourself to
be a desperately guilty woman. You require a great deal of petting and
looking after, Nastasia Philipovna, and I will do this. I saw your
portrait this morning, and it seemed quite a familiar face to me; it
seemed to me that the portrait-face was calling to me for help. I—I
shall respect you all my life, Nastasia Philipovna,” concluded the
prince, as though suddenly recollecting himself, and blushing to think
of the sort of company before whom he had said all this.

Ptitsin bowed his head and looked at the ground, overcome by a mixture
of feelings. Totski muttered to himself: “He may be an idiot, but he
knows that flattery is the best road to success here.”

The prince observed Gania’s eyes flashing at him, as though they would
gladly annihilate him then and there.

“That’s a kind-hearted man, if you like,” said Daria Alexeyevna, whose
wrath was quickly evaporating.

“A refined man, but—lost,” murmured the general.

Totski took his hat and rose to go. He and the general exchanged
glances, making a private arrangement, thereby, to leave the house
together.

“Thank you, prince; no one has ever spoken to me like that before,”
began Nastasia Philipovna. “Men have always bargained for me, before
this; and not a single respectable man has ever proposed to marry me.
Do you hear, Afanasy Ivanovitch? What do _you_ think of what the prince
has just been saying? It was almost immodest, wasn’t it? You, Rogojin,
wait a moment, don’t go yet! I see you don’t intend to move however.
Perhaps I may go with you yet. Where did you mean to take me to?”

“To Ekaterinhof,” replied Lebedeff. Rogojin simply stood staring, with
trembling lips, not daring to believe his ears. He was stunned, as
though from a blow on the head.

“What are you thinking of, my dear Nastasia?” said Daria Alexeyevna in
alarm. “What are you saying?” “You are not going mad, are you?”

Nastasia Philipovna burst out laughing and jumped up from the sofa.

“You thought I should accept this good child’s invitation to ruin him,
did you?” she cried. “That’s Totski’s way, not mine. He’s fond of
children. Come along, Rogojin, get your money ready! We won’t talk
about marrying just at this moment, but let’s see the money at all
events. Come! I may not marry you, either. I don’t know. I suppose you
thought you’d keep the money, if I did! Ha, ha, ha! nonsense! I have no
sense of shame left. I tell you I have been Totski’s concubine. Prince,
you must marry Aglaya Ivanovna, not Nastasia Philipovna, or this fellow
Ferdishenko will always be pointing the finger of scorn at you. You
aren’t afraid, I know; but I should always be afraid that I had ruined
you, and that you would reproach me for it. As for what you say about
my doing you honour by marrying you—well, Totski can tell you all about
that. You had your eye on Aglaya, Gania, you know you had; and you
might have married her if you had not come bargaining. You are all like
this. You should choose, once for all, between disreputable women, and
respectable ones, or you are sure to get mixed. Look at the general,
how he’s staring at me!”

“This is too horrible,” said the general, starting to his feet. All
were standing up now. Nastasia was absolutely beside herself.

“I am very proud, in spite of what I am,” she continued. “You called me
‘perfection’ just now, prince. A nice sort of perfection to throw up a
prince and a million and a half of roubles in order to be able to boast
of the fact afterwards! What sort of a wife should I make for you,
after all I have said? Afanasy Ivanovitch, do you observe I have really
and truly thrown away a million of roubles? And you thought that I
should consider your wretched seventy-five thousand, with Gania thrown
in for a husband, a paradise of bliss! Take your seventy-five thousand
back, sir; you did not reach the hundred thousand. Rogojin cut a better
dash than you did. I’ll console Gania myself; I have an idea about
that. But now I must be off! I’ve been in prison for ten years. I’m
free at last! Well, Rogojin, what are you waiting for? Let’s get ready
and go.”

“Come along!” shouted Rogojin, beside himself with joy. “Hey! all of
you fellows! Wine! Round with it! Fill the glasses!”

“Get away!” he shouted frantically, observing that Daria Alexeyevna was
approaching to protest against Nastasia’s conduct. “Get away, she’s
mine, everything’s mine! She’s a queen, get away!”

He was panting with ecstasy. He walked round and round Nastasia
Philipovna and told everybody to “keep their distance.”

All the Rogojin company were now collected in the drawing-room; some
were drinking, some laughed and talked: all were in the highest and
wildest spirits. Ferdishenko was doing his best to unite himself to
them; the general and Totski again made an attempt to go. Gania, too
stood hat in hand ready to go; but seemed to be unable to tear his eyes
away from the scene before him.

“Get out, keep your distance!” shouted Rogojin.

“What are you shouting about there!” cried Nastasia “I’m not yours yet.
I may kick you out for all you know I haven’t taken your money yet;
there it all is on the table. Here, give me over that packet! Is there
a hundred thousand roubles in that one packet? Pfu! what abominable
stuff it looks! Oh! nonsense, Daria Alexeyevna; you surely did not
expect me to ruin _him?_” (indicating the prince). “Fancy him nursing
me! Why, he needs a nurse himself! The general, there, will be his
nurse now, you’ll see. Here, prince, look here! Your bride is accepting
money. What a disreputable woman she must be! And you wished to marry
her! What are you crying about? Is it a bitter dose? Never mind, you
shall laugh yet. Trust to time.” (In spite of these words there were
two large tears rolling down Nastasia’s own cheeks.) “It’s far better
to think twice of it now than afterwards. Oh! you mustn’t cry like
that! There’s Katia crying, too. What is it, Katia, dear? I shall leave
you and Pasha a lot of things, I’ve laid them out for you already; but
good-bye, now. I made an honest girl like you serve a low woman like
myself. It’s better so, prince, it is indeed. You’d begin to despise me
afterwards—we should never be happy. Oh! you needn’t swear, prince, I
shan’t believe you, you know. How foolish it would be, too! No, no;
we’d better say good-bye and part friends. I am a bit of a dreamer
myself, and I used to dream of you once. Very often during those five
years down at his estate I used to dream and think, and I always
imagined just such a good, honest, foolish fellow as you, one who
should come and say to me: ‘You are an innocent woman, Nastasia
Philipovna, and I adore you.’ I dreamt of you often. I used to think so
much down there that I nearly went mad; and then this fellow here would
come down. He would stay a couple of months out of the twelve, and
disgrace and insult and deprave me, and then go; so that I longed to
drown myself in the pond a thousand times over; but I did not dare do
it. I hadn’t the heart, and now—well, are you ready, Rogojin?”

“Ready—keep your distance, all of you!”

“We’re all ready,” said several of his friends. “The troikas [Sledges
drawn by three horses abreast.] are at the door, bells and all.”

Nastasia Philipovna seized the packet of bank-notes.

“Gania, I have an idea. I wish to recompense you—why should you lose
all? Rogojin, would he crawl for three roubles as far as the
Vassiliostrof?”

“Oh, wouldn’t he just!”

“Well, look here, Gania. I wish to look into your heart once more, for
the last time. You’ve worried me for the last three months—now it’s my
turn. Do you see this packet? It contains a hundred thousand roubles.
Now, I’m going to throw it into the fire, here—before all these
witnesses. As soon as the fire catches hold of it, you put your hands
into the fire and pick it out—without gloves, you know. You must have
bare hands, and you must turn your sleeves up. Pull it out, I say, and
it’s all yours. You may burn your fingers a little, of course; but then
it’s a hundred thousand roubles, remember—it won’t take you long to lay
hold of it and snatch it out. I shall so much admire you if you put
your hands into the fire for my money. All here present may be
witnesses that the whole packet of money is yours if you get it out. If
you don’t get it out, it shall burn. I will let no one else come;
away—get away, all of you—it’s my money! Rogojin has bought me with it.
Is it my money, Rogojin?”

“Yes, my queen; it’s your own money, my joy.”

“Get away then, all of you. I shall do as I like with my own—don’t
meddle! Ferdishenko, make up the fire, quick!”

“Nastasia Philipovna, I can’t; my hands won’t obey me,” said
Ferdishenko, astounded and helpless with bewilderment.

“Nonsense,” cried Nastasia Philipovna, seizing the poker and raking a
couple of logs together. No sooner did a tongue of flame burst out than
she threw the packet of notes upon it.

Everyone gasped; some even crossed themselves.

“She’s mad—she’s mad!” was the cry.

“Oughtn’t-oughtn’t we to secure her?” asked the general of Ptitsin, in
a whisper; “or shall we send for the authorities? Why, she’s mad, isn’t
she—isn’t she, eh?”

“N-no, I hardly think she is actually mad,” whispered Ptitsin, who was
as white as his handkerchief, and trembling like a leaf. He could not
take his eyes off the smouldering packet.

“She’s mad surely, isn’t she?” the general appealed to Totski.

“I told you she wasn’t an ordinary woman,” replied the latter, who was
as pale as anyone.

“Oh, but, positively, you know—a hundred thousand roubles!”

“Goodness gracious! good heavens!” came from all quarters of the room.

All now crowded round the fire and thronged to see what was going on;
everyone lamented and gave vent to exclamations of horror and woe. Some
jumped up on chairs in order to get a better view. Daria Alexeyevna ran
into the next room and whispered excitedly to Katia and Pasha. The
beautiful German disappeared altogether.

“My lady! my sovereign!” lamented Lebedeff, falling on his knees before
Nastasia Philipovna, and stretching out his hands towards the fire;
“it’s a hundred thousand roubles, it is indeed, I packed it up myself,
I saw the money! My queen, let me get into the fire after it—say the
word—I’ll put my whole grey head into the fire for it! I have a poor
lame wife and thirteen children. My father died of starvation last
week. Nastasia Philipovna, Nastasia Philipovna!” The wretched little
man wept, and groaned, and crawled towards the fire.

“Away, out of the way!” cried Nastasia. “Make room, all of you! Gania,
what are you standing there for? Don’t stand on ceremony. Put in your
hand! There’s your whole happiness smouldering away, look! Quick!”

But Gania had borne too much that day, and especially this evening, and
he was not prepared for this last, quite unexpected trial.

The crowd parted on each side of him and he was left face to face with
Nastasia Philipovna, three paces from her. She stood by the fire and
waited, with her intent gaze fixed upon him.

Gania stood before her, in his evening clothes, holding his white
gloves and hat in his hand, speechless and motionless, with arms folded
and eyes fixed on the fire.

A silly, meaningless smile played on his white, death-like lips. He
could not take his eyes off the smouldering packet; but it appeared
that something new had come to birth in his soul—as though he were
vowing to himself that he would bear this trial. He did not move from
his place. In a few seconds it became evident to all that he did not
intend to rescue the money.

“Hey! look at it, it’ll burn in another minute or two!” cried Nastasia
Philipovna. “You’ll hang yourself afterwards, you know, if it does! I’m
not joking.”

The fire, choked between a couple of smouldering pieces of wood, had
died down for the first few moments after the packet was thrown upon
it. But a little tongue of fire now began to lick the paper from below,
and soon, gathering courage, mounted the sides of the parcel, and crept
around it. In another moment, the whole of it burst into flames, and
the exclamations of woe and horror were redoubled.

“Nastasia Philipovna!” lamented Lebedeff again, straining towards the
fireplace; but Rogojin dragged him away, and pushed him to the rear
once more.

The whole of Rogojin’s being was concentrated in one rapturous gaze of
ecstasy. He could not take his eyes off Nastasia. He stood drinking her
in, as it were. He was in the seventh heaven of delight.

“Oh, what a queen she is!” he ejaculated, every other minute, throwing
out the remark for anyone who liked to catch it. “That’s the sort of
woman for me! Which of you would think of doing a thing like that, you
blackguards, eh?” he yelled. He was hopelessly and wildly beside
himself with ecstasy.

The prince watched the whole scene, silent and dejected.

“I’ll pull it out with my teeth for one thousand,” said Ferdishenko.

“So would I,” said another, from behind, “with pleasure. Devil take the
thing!” he added, in a tempest of despair, “it will all be burnt up in
a minute—It’s burning, it’s burning!”

“It’s burning, it’s burning!” cried all, thronging nearer and nearer to
the fire in their excitement.

“Gania, don’t be a fool! I tell you for the last time.”

“Get on, quick!” shrieked Ferdishenko, rushing wildly up to Gania, and
trying to drag him to the fire by the sleeve of his coat. “Get it, you
dummy, it’s burning away fast! Oh—_damn_ the thing!”

Gania hurled Ferdishenko from him; then he turned sharp round and made
for the door. But he had not gone a couple of steps when he tottered
and fell to the ground.

“He’s fainted!” the cry went round.

“And the money’s burning still,” Lebedeff lamented.

“Burning for nothing,” shouted others.

“Katia-Pasha! Bring him some water!” cried Nastasia Philipovna. Then
she took the tongs and fished out the packet.

Nearly the whole of the outer covering was burned away, but it was soon
evident that the contents were hardly touched. The packet had been
wrapped in a threefold covering of newspaper, and the notes were safe.
All breathed more freely.

“Some dirty little thousand or so may be touched,” said Lebedeff,
immensely relieved, “but there’s very little harm done, after all.”

“It’s all his—the whole packet is for him, do you hear—all of you?”
cried Nastasia Philipovna, placing the packet by the side of Gania. “He
restrained himself, and didn’t go after it; so his self-respect is
greater than his thirst for money. All right—he’ll come to directly—he
must have the packet or he’ll cut his throat afterwards. There! He’s
coming to himself. General, Totski, all of you, did you hear me? The
money is all Gania’s. I give it to him, fully conscious of my action,
as recompense for—well, for anything he thinks best. Tell him so. Let
it lie here beside him. Off we go, Rogojin! Goodbye, prince. I have
seen a man for the first time in my life. Goodbye, Afanasy
Ivanovitch—and thanks!”

The Rogojin gang followed their leader and Nastasia Philipovna to the
entrance-hall, laughing and shouting and whistling.

In the hall the servants were waiting, and handed her her fur cloak.
Martha, the cook, ran in from the kitchen. Nastasia kissed them all
round.

“Are you really throwing us all over, little mother? Where, where are
you going to? And on your birthday, too!” cried the four girls, crying
over her and kissing her hands.

“I am going out into the world, Katia; perhaps I shall be a laundress.
I don’t know. No more of Afanasy Ivanovitch, anyhow. Give him my
respects. Don’t think badly of me, girls.”

The prince hurried down to the front gate where the party were settling
into the troikas, all the bells tinkling a merry accompaniment the
while. The general caught him up on the stairs:

“Prince, prince!” he cried, seizing hold of his arm, “recollect
yourself! Drop her, prince! You see what sort of a woman she is. I am
speaking to you like a father.”

The prince glanced at him, but said nothing. He shook himself free, and
rushed on downstairs.

The general was just in time to see the prince take the first sledge he
could get, and, giving the order to Ekaterinhof, start off in pursuit
of the troikas. Then the general’s fine grey horse dragged that worthy
home, with some new thoughts, and some new hopes and calculations
developing in his brain, and with the pearls in his pocket, for he had
not forgotten to bring them along with him, being a man of business.
Amid his new thoughts and ideas there came, once or twice, the image of
Nastasia Philipovna. The general sighed.

“I’m sorry, really sorry,” he muttered. “She’s a ruined woman. Mad!
mad! However, the prince is not for Nastasia Philipovna now,—perhaps
it’s as well.”

Two more of Nastasia’s guests, who walked a short distance together,
indulged in high moral sentiments of a similar nature.

“Do you know, Totski, this is all very like what they say goes on among
the Japanese?” said Ptitsin. “The offended party there, they say,
marches off to his insulter and says to him, ‘You insulted me, so I
have come to rip myself open before your eyes;’ and with these words he
does actually rip his stomach open before his enemy, and considers,
doubtless, that he is having all possible and necessary satisfaction
and revenge. There are strange characters in the world, sir!”

“H’m! and you think there was something of this sort here, do you? Dear
me—a very remarkable comparison, you know! But you must have observed,
my dear Ptitsin, that I did all I possibly could. I could do no more
than I did. And you must admit that there are some rare qualities in
this woman. I felt I could not speak in that Bedlam, or I should have
been tempted to cry out, when she reproached me, that she herself was
my best justification. Such a woman could make anyone forget all
reason—everything! Even that moujik, Rogojin, you saw, brought her a
hundred thousand roubles! Of course, all that happened tonight was
ephemeral, fantastic, unseemly—yet it lacked neither colour nor
originality. My God! What might not have been made of such a character
combined with such beauty! Yet in spite of all efforts—in spite of all
education, even—all those gifts are wasted! She is an uncut diamond....
I have often said so.”

And Afanasy Ivanovitch heaved a deep sigh.

